Headaches in Pregnancy and Postpartum: ACOG Clinical Practic... : Obstetrics & Gynecology Headaches in Pregnancy and Postpartum: ACOG Clinical Practice Guideline No. 3 : Obstetrics & Gynecology You may be trying to access this site from a secured browser on the server. Please enable scripts and reload this page. ACOG.org ACOG Clinical Green Journal For Patients Store Visit our other sites ACOG.org ACOG Clinical Green Journal For Parents Store ACOG.org ACOG Clinical Green Journal For Parents Store Log in or Register Subscribe to journalSubscribe Get new issue alertsGet alerts Subscribe to eTOC Secondary Logo Enter your Email address: Wolters Kluwer Health may email you for journal alerts and information, but is committed to maintaining your privacy and will not share your personal information without your express consent. For more information, please refer to our Privacy Policy. Journal Logo ArticlesArticles Advanced Search Toggle navigation Subscribe Register Login Browsing History Articles & Issues Current Issue Previous Issues Latest Articles CME Collections ABOG MOC II Podcasts Videos Video Abstracts Video Gallery Journal Info About the Journal About the Society Editorial Board Citations and Impact Factor Information for Authors Information for Reviewers Language Editing Services Advertising Subscription Services Reprints Rights and Permissions Authors Editorial Manager Instructions for Authors ArticlesArticles Advanced Search May 2022 - Volume 139 - Issue 5 Previous Abstract CiteCopyExport to RISExport to EndNoteShareEmailFacebookTwitterLinkedInFavoritesPermissionsMoreCitePermissions Article as EPUB Export All Images to PowerPoint File Add to My Favorites Email to Colleague Colleague's E-mail is Invalid Your Name: Colleague's Email: Separate multiple e-mails with a (;). Message: Thought you might appreciate this item(s) I saw in Obstetrics & Gynecology. Your message has been successfully sent to your colleague. Some error has occurred while processing your request. Please try after some time. Export to End Note Procite Reference Manager Save my selection ACOG PublicationsHeadaches in Pregnancy and Postpartum ACOG Clinical Practice Guideline No. 3 Author Information The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) reviews its publications regularly; however, its publications may not reflect the most recent evidence. A reaffirmation date is included in the online version of a document to indicate when it was last reviewed. The current status and any updates of this document can be found on acog.org/clinical. This information is designed as an educational resource to aid clinicians in providing obstetric and gynecologic care, and use of this information is voluntary. This information should not be considered as inclusive of all proper treatments or methods of care or as a statement of the standard of care. It is not intended to substitute for the independent professional judgment of the treating clinician. Variations in practice may be warranted when, in the reasonable judgment of the treating clinician, such course of action is indicated by the condition of the patient, limitations of available resources, or advances in knowledge or technology. While ACOG makes every effort to present accurate and reliable information, this publication is provided “as is” without any warranty of accuracy, reliability, or otherwise, either express or implied. ACOG does not guarantee, warrant, or endorse the products or services of any firm, organization, or person. Neither ACOG nor its officers, directors, members, employees, or agents will be liable for any loss, damage, or claim with respect to any liabilities, including direct, special, indirect, or consequential damages, incurred in connection with this publication or reliance on the information presented. Obstetrics & Gynecology 139(5):p 944-972, May 2022. | DOI: 10.1097/AOG.0000000000004766 Buy Erratum Metrics Abstract PURPOSE: To provide updated evidence-based recommendations for the evaluation and treatment of primary and secondary headaches in pregnancy and postpartum. TARGET POPULATION: Pregnant and postpartum patients with a history of or experiencing primary or new secondary headaches. METHODS: This guideline was developed using an a priori protocol in conjunction with a writing team consisting of two specialists in obstetrics and gynecology appointed by the ACOG Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines–Obstetrics and one external subject matter expert. ACOG medical librarians completed a comprehensive literature search for primary literature within Cochrane Library, Cochrane Collaboration Registry of Controlled Trials, EMBASE, PubMed, and MEDLINE. Studies that moved forward to the full-text screening stage were assessed by two authors from the writing team based on standardized inclusion and exclusion criteria. Included studies underwent quality assessment, and a modified GRADE (Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation) evidence-to-decision framework was applied to interpret and translate the evidence into recommendation statements. RECOMMENDATIONS: This Clinical Practice Guideline includes recommendations on interventions to prevent primary headache in individuals who are pregnant or attempting to become pregnant, postpartum, or breastfeeding; evaluation for symptomatic patients presenting with primary and secondary headaches during pregnancy; and treatment options for primary and secondary headaches during pregnancy and lactation. Recommendations are classified by strength and evidence quality. Ungraded Good Practice Points are included to provide guidance when a formal recommendation could not be made because of inadequate or nonexistent evidence. Erratum In “Clinical Practice Guideline No. 3” from the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,1 there is an error in the document's reference citation listed on page 972. The publication year is erroneously listed as “2021.” The full, corrected citation is as follows: “Headaches in Pregnancy and Postpartum. Clinical Practice Guideline No. 3. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Obstet Gynecol 2022;139:944-72.” Obstetrics & Gynecology. 140(2):344, August 2022. © 2022 by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved. Full Text Access for Subscribers: Individual Subscribers Log in for access ACOG Members, please click “Log in here” to access content Log in here > Institutional Users Access through Ovid® Not a Subscriber? Buy Subscribe Request Permissions Become a Society Member You can read the full text of this article if you: Select an option Log In Buy Article Subscribe Society Membership Content & Permissions Access through Ovid Log In Access through Ovid Source Headaches in Pregnancy and Postpartum: ACOG Clinical Practice Guideline No. 3 Obstetrics & Gynecology139(5):944-972, May 2022. Full-Size Email + Favorites Export View in Gallery Email to Colleague Colleague's E-mail is Invalid Your Name: Colleague's Email: Separate multiple e-mails with a (;). Message: Thought you might appreciate this item(s) I saw in Obstetrics & Gynecology. Your message has been successfully sent to your colleague. Some error has occurred while processing your request. Please try after some time. Looking for ABOG articles? Visit our ABOG MOC II collection. The selected Green Journal articles are free through the end of the calendar year. ACOG MEMBER SUBSCRIPTION ACCESS If you are an ACOG Fellow and have not logged in or registered to Obstetrics & Gynecology, please follow these step-by-step instructions to access journal content with your member subscription. Article as EPUB Export All Images to PowerPoint File Add to My Favorites Email to Colleague Colleague's E-mail is Invalid Your Name: Colleague's Email: Separate multiple e-mails with a (;). Message: Thought you might appreciate this item(s) I saw in Obstetrics & Gynecology. Your message has been successfully sent to your colleague. Some error has occurred while processing your request. Please try after some time. Export to End Note Procite Reference Manager Save my selection Article Level Metrics Related Videos Data is temporarily unavailable. Please try again soon. Related Collections ACOG Publications: May 2022 Issue ACOG: Clinical Practice Guidelines Readers Of this Article Also Read ACOG Clinical Practice Guideline No. 3: Headaches in Pregnancy and Postpartum: Correction Pregnancy at Age 35 Years or Older: ACOG Obstetric Care Consensus No. 11 In Gratitude Endometrial Hyperplasia Top 10 Pearls for the Recognition, Evaluation, and Management of Maternal Sepsis Back to Top Never Miss an Issue Get new journal Tables of Contents sent right to your email inbox Get New Issue Alerts Browse Journal Content Most Popular For Authors About the Journal Past Issues Current Issue Register on the website Subscribe Get eTOC Alerts For Journal Authors Submit an article How to publish with us Customer Service Live Chat Chat Offline Activate your journal subscription Activate Journal Subscription Browse the help center Help Contact us at: Support: Submit a Service Request TEL: (USA): TEL: (Int’l): 800-638-3030 (within USA) 301-223-2300 (international) Manage Cookie Preferences Privacy Policy (Updated June 29, 2023) Legal Disclaimer Terms of Use Open Access Policy Contact Us Feedback Sitemap RSS Feeds LWW Journals Copyright © 2023 by The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists Your PrivacyTo give you the best possible experience we use cookies and similar technologies. We use data collected through these technologies for various purposes, including to enhance website functionality, remember your preferences, show the most relevant content, and show the most useful ads. You can select your preferences by clicking the link. For more information, please review our Privacy & Cookie NoticeReject All Cookies Accept All CookiesManage Cookie PreferencesPrivacy Preference CenterWhen you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow certain types of cookies on our website. Click on the different category headings to find out more and manage your cookie preferences. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience on the site and the services we are able to offer. Privacy & Cookie NoticeAllow AllManage Consent PreferencesStrictly Necessary CookiesAlways ActiveThese cookies are necessary for the website to function. They are usually set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, this may have an effect on the proper functioning of (parts of) the site.View Vendor Details‎Functional Cookies Functional Cookies These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality, user experience and personalization, and may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies, then some or all of these services may not function properly.View Vendor Details‎Performance Cookies Performance Cookies These cookies support analytic services that measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site.View Vendor Details‎Advertising Cookies Advertising Cookies These cookies may collect insights to issue personalized content and advertising on our own and other websites, and may be set through our site by third party providers. If you do not allow these cookies, you may still see basic advertising on your browser that is generic and not based on your interests.View Vendor Details‎Back ButtonPerformance Cookies Search IconFilter IconClear checkbox label labelApply CancelConsent Leg.Interest checkbox label label checkbox label label checkbox label labelView CookiesNamecookie nameReject All Confirm My Choices