Migraine increases the risk of complications during pregnancy and childbirth | ScienceDaily Your source for the latest research news Follow: Facebook X/Twitter Subscribe: RSS Feeds Newsletter New! Stay informed with our free email newsletter. advertisement Science News from research organizations Migraine increases the risk of complications during pregnancy and childbirth Date: June 26, 2019 Source: Aarhus University Summary: Pregnant women with migraine have an increased risk of miscarriage, caesarean sections and giving birth to a child with low birth weight. This is shown by a comprehensive register-based study. The study also suggests that prescription migraine drugs may alleviate the complications. Share: Facebook Twitter Pinterest LinkedIN Email advertisement FULL STORY Despite the fact that many women who suffer migraines find that the number and severity of these severe headaches decrease during pregnancy, migraines are now being linked to elevated blood pressure, abortions, caesareans, preterm births and babies with low birth weight. This is documented by an extensive register-based study recently published in the scientific journal Headache and carried out at the Department of Clinical Epidemiology at Aarhus University and Aarhus University Hospital, Denmark. "The study shows that pregnant women with migraine more often have complications in connection with their pregnancy and childbirth than women who don't suffer from migraine. Newborn babies whose mothers suffered from migraine during pregnancy also have an increased risk of complications such as respiratory distress and febrile seizures," says Nils Skajaa, BSc, who is the study's lead author. He is employed as a researcher at the Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Aarhus University and Aarhus University Hospital. The researchers behind the study used the Danish health registers to identify more than 22,000 pregnant women with migraine who were in contact with a hospital as a result of their migraine or had received at least two prescriptions for migraine medication. The group was compared with an approximately ten times larger group of pregnant women without known migraine. One finding in the study is that the risk of caesarean sections is between 15-25 per cent higher for pregnant women with migraine compared with pregnant women without migraine. Around twenty per cent of all births in Denmark are by caesarean section. Researchers have also used the same data to deduce that migraine medication possibly prevents some of the complications. However, the results must be interpreted with caution, as Nils Skajaa explains: "The study was not specifically designed to examine this aspect. However, we show that the risk of complications generally was lower for pregnant women with migraine who took medication when compared with the pregnant women with migraines who were not treated. This also indicates that the migraine medication isn't the cause of the complications, but rather the migraine itself. This is important knowledge for pregnant women with migraines," says Nils Skajaa. Migraines are relatively common and affect twice as many women as men. The actual cause remains unknown, but previous research suggests that migraines may be triggered by stress, fatigue, or hormonal changes such as pregnancy. "Paradoxically, women of childbearing age are particularly hard hit by migraines. Although experience shows that migraines become milder during pregnancy, this study emphasises that the healthcare service should be particularly aware of pregnant women with migraine," says Nils Skajaa. RELATED TOPICS Health & Medicine Headache Research Pregnancy and Childbirth Gynecology Teen Health Mind & Brain Headaches Gender Difference Disorders and Syndromes Racial Issues RELATED TERMS Migraine Birth weight Birth control Premature birth Abortion Childbirth Fetus Postpartum depression advertisement Story Source: Materials provided by Aarhus University. Note: Content may be edited for style and length. Journal Reference: Nils Skajaa, Szimonetta K. Szépligeti, Fei Xue, Henrik Toft Sørensen, Vera Ehrenstein, Osa Eisele, Kasper Adelborg. Pregnancy, Birth, Neonatal, and Postnatal Neurological Outcomes After Pregnancy With Migraine. Headache: The Journal of Head and Face Pain, 2019; 59 (6): 869 DOI: 10.1111/head.13536 Cite This Page: MLA APA Chicago Aarhus University. "Migraine increases the risk of complications during pregnancy and childbirth." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 26 June 2019. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2019/06/190626125111.htm>. Aarhus University. (2019, June 26). Migraine increases the risk of complications during pregnancy and childbirth. ScienceDaily. Retrieved October 20, 2023 from www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2019/06/190626125111.htm Aarhus University. "Migraine increases the risk of complications during pregnancy and childbirth." ScienceDaily. www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2019/06/190626125111.htm (accessed October 20, 2023). Explore More from ScienceDaily RELATED STORIES Migraine Associated With Increased Risk for Pregnancy Complications Jan. 31, 2023 — Women are disproportionately affected by migraine, especially during their reproductive years. However, the relationship between migraine and adverse pregnancy outcomes has not been well understood. ... When Reproductive Rights Are Less Restrictive, Babies Are Born Healthier Oct. 13, 2020 — American women living in states with less restrictive reproductive rights policies are less likely to give birth to low-birth weight babies, according to a new study. The findings show that women, ... Migraines May Increase Risk of Pregnancy Complications May 9, 2019 — In a study of women in Denmark with and without migraines who became pregnant, migraines were associated with an increased risk of pregnancy-associated hypertension disorders in the mother. Also, in ... Pregnant Women With Long Commutes to Work at Increased Risk for Adverse Birth Outcomes Apr. 1, 2019 — Researchers have found that pregnant women who commute long-distance to work have an increased risk of adverse birth outcomes, including having babies born at a low-birth weight. The study is the ... Print Email Share Breaking this hour Holy Bat Skull! Red Meat and Type 2 Diabetes Risk Black Holes Could Come in 'Perfect Pairs' Most Distant Fast Radio Burst Ever Genetics of the Common Octopus You Don't Lose If You Snooze Evolutionary Secrets of Famous Killer Whale Flex a Finger to Power a Wearable Device Miniature Particle Accelerator Works Gene Therapy Can Effectively Target Glioblastoma Trending Topics this week HEALTH & MEDICINE Healthy Aging Mental Health Research Heart Disease MIND & BRAIN Dementia Infant and Preschool Learning Sleep Disorders LIVING & WELL Healthy Aging Fitness Staying Healthy advertisement Strange & Offbeat HEALTH & MEDICINE Wearable Device Makes Memories and Powers Up With the Flex of a Finger The Encounter Between Neanderthals and Sapiens as Told by Their Genomes Cell-Friendly Bioprinting at High Fidelity Enhances Its Medical Applicability MIND & BRAIN Researchers Reconstruct Speech from Brain Activity, Illuminates Complex Neural Processes Neanderthal Gene Variants Associated With Greater Pain Sensitivity Extreme Sports: How Body and Mind Interact LIVING & WELL Skin Behind the Ears and Between the Toes Can Host a Collection of Unhealthy Microbes Your Body's Own Cannabinoid Molecules Calm You During Stress Lower Jersey Numbers Make Football Players Look Thinner Toggle navigation Menu SD SD Home Page Top Science News Latest News Home Home Page Top Science News Latest News Health View all the latest top news in the health sciences, or browse the topics below: Health & Medicine Allergy Cancer Cold and Flu Diabetes Heart Disease ... more topics Mind & Brain ADD and ADHD Alzheimer's Headaches Intelligence Psychology ... more topics Living Well Parenting Child Development Stress Nutrition Fitness ... more topics Tech View all the latest top news in the physical sciences & technology, or browse the topics below: Matter & Energy Chemistry Fossil Fuels Nanotechnology Physics Solar Energy ... more topics Space & Time Black Holes Dark Matter Extrasolar Planets Solar System Space Telescopes ... more topics Computers & Math Artificial Intelligence Mathematics Quantum Computers Robotics Virtual Reality ... more topics Enviro View all the latest top news in the environmental sciences, or browse the topics below: Plants & Animals Agriculture and Food Biology Biotechnology Extinction Microbes and More ... more topics Earth & Climate Climate Earthquakes Geology Global Warming Pollution ... more topics Fossils & Ruins Anthropology Archaeology Dinosaurs Evolution Paleontology ... more topics Society View all the latest top news in the social sciences & education, or browse the topics below: Science & Society Arts & Culture Economics Privacy Issues Public Health Sports ... more topics Business & Industry Computers & Internet Energy & Resources Engineering Medical Technology Transportation ... more topics Education & Learning Creativity Educational Psychology Infant & Preschool Learning Disorders STEM Education ... more topics Quirky Top News Human Quirks Odd Creatures Bizarre Things Weird World Keyword:Search Free Subscriptions Stay informed with ScienceDaily's free email newsletter, updated daily and weekly. Or view our many newsfeeds in your RSS reader: Email Newsletter RSS Feeds Follow Us Keep up to date with the latest news from ScienceDaily via social networks: Facebook X / Twitter Have Feedback? Tell us what you think of ScienceDaily -- we welcome both positive and negative comments. Have any problems using the site? Questions? Leave Feedback Contact Us About This Site | Staff | Reviews | Contribute | Advertise | Privacy Policy | Editorial Policy | Terms of Use Copyright 1995-2023 ScienceDaily or by other parties, where indicated. All rights controlled by their respective owners. Content on this website is for information only. It is not intended to provide medical or other professional advice. Views expressed here do not necessarily reflect those of ScienceDaily, its staff, its contributors, or its partners. Financial support for ScienceDaily comes from advertisements and referral programs, where indicated. — Manage My Privacy Settings — Share this page ... Migraine increases the risk of complications during pregnancy and childbirth https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2019/06/190626125111.htm Pregnant women with migraine have an increased risk of miscarriage, caesarean sections and giving birth to a child with low birth weight. This is shown by a comprehensive register-based study. The study also suggests that prescription migraine drugs may alleviate the complications. Facebook Twitter Pinterest LinkedIN Email Close