Visual impairment and associated factors among pregnant women attending antenatal care units at health institutions in Gondar City Administration, Northwest Ethiopia | BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth | Full Text Your privacy, your choice We use essential cookies to make sure the site can function. We also use optional cookies for advertising, personalisation of content, usage analysis, and social media. By accepting optional cookies, you consent to the processing of your personal data - including transfers to third parties. Some third parties are outside of the European Economic Area, with varying standards of data protection. See our privacy policy for more information on the use of your personal data. Manage preferences for further information and to change your choices. Accept all cookies Skip to main content Advertisement Search Explore journals Get published About BMC Login Menu Explore journals Get published About BMC Login Search all BMC articles Search BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth Home About Articles Collections Submission Guidelines Join the Editorial Board Submit manuscript Visual impairment and associated factors among pregnant women attending antenatal care units at health institutions in Gondar City Administration, Northwest Ethiopia Download PDF Download PDF Research Open access Published: 13 December 2021 Visual impairment and associated factors among pregnant women attending antenatal care units at health institutions in Gondar City Administration, Northwest Ethiopia Mengistie Diress1, Yitayeh Belsti1, Mihret Getnet1, Sofonias Addis Fekadu2, Baye Dagnew1, Yonas Akalu1, Mohammed Abdu Seid3 & …Yibeltal Yismaw Gela1 Show authors BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth volume 21, Article number: 824 (2021) Cite this article 2483 Accesses 2 Citations Metrics details AbstractBackgroundVisual impairment is a major public health concern among women of reproductive age groups in Ethiopia, which is getting worse during pregnancy. Though visual impairment has lots of serious consequences across the life course of pregnant women, there is no previous study on this topic in Ethiopia. Thus, this study determined the prevalence of visual impairment and identified associated factors among pregnant women attending antenatal care units at the governmental health institutions in Gondar City Administration, Northwest Ethiopia.MethodsAn institution-based cross-sectional study was conducted. A systematic random sampling technique was used to recruit the study participants. We used an interviewer-administered questionnaire comprising of socio-demographic, clinical and pregnancy-related variables to collect the required data. Snellen’s illiterate “E” chart was used to determine visual impairment. EpiData 3 and Stata 14 were used for data entry and statistical analysis, respectively. Both bivariable and multivariable binary logistic regression analyses were executed to identify associated factors of visual impairment. Variables with a p-value ≤0.05 in the multivariable logistic regression analysis were declared as statistically significant with visual impairment.ResultsA total of 417 (response rate = 98.6%) participants were involved in this study, with a median age of 27 years. The overall prevalence of visual impairment was 22.5% (95% CI: 18.5–26.6). Thirty (7.2%) and thirty-two (7.7%) of the study participants had moderate to severe visual impairments in their right and left eyes, respectively. Participants aged from 31 to 49 years (AOR = 2.1; 95% CI: 1.1–4.0), being 3rd trimester (AOR = 2.4; 95% CI: 1.3–4.5), multi & grand multipara (AOR = 2.3; 95% CI: 1.2–4.6), and history of contraceptive use (AOR = 2.7; 95% CI: 1.2–6.3) had higher chance of visual impairment.ConclusionThe magnitude of visual impairment among pregnant women was high in the study area. Therefore, routine screening and evaluation of pregnant women for visual condition during antenatal care visits is recommended. Further investigations of visual changes, particularly as a result of pregnancy, are warranted. Peer Review reports IntroductionVisual impairment (VI) is a state in which one or more functions of the visual system are troubled due to physiological or pathological disorders aroused from either or both eyes [1]. According to the revised definition by the World Health Organization (WHO), VI is defined as the presenting distance visual acuity (PVA) worse than 6/12 in the better eye. It is classified as mild (PVA < 6/12 to ≥6/18), moderate (PVA < 6/18 to ≥6/60), severe (PVA < 6/60 to ≥3/60), and blind (PVA < 3/60) in the better eye [1, 2].Globally, about 2.2 billion people have been suffered by vision impairment, which is more worryingly in developing countries, among elderly people, females, and rural communities [1, 3]. Based on a systematic review and meta-analysis in 2017, females are highly affected by VI [3, 4]. Another study reported that the incidence of VI among women is 55% (139 million) out of 253 million people in the world who are visually impaired [3]. The prevalence of vision loss among women in sub-Saharan Africa is 4.17% [5]. Based on the national survey in Ethiopia, mild and moderate to severe visual impairment (MSVI) are more prevalent among females which accounts 4.1% [6].During pregnancy, metabolic and hormonal changes can upset the normal visual functions of the women’s eyes. Vision impairment is a chief complaint of most women during pregnancy. This problem is due to either physiological changes or exacerbations of pre-existing medical conditions [7,8,9]. Most ocular changes occurred in pregnancy are temporary but occasionally lead to permanent complications that may affect the health of the women [7, 9]. In Iran, the visual problem was observed in 89.2% of pregnant women which is worse in the third trimester of gestation [8]. Another study in Nigeria showed that VI due to refractive error is the common problem during pregnancy though most of them are transient [7]. According to a recent study in Ethiopia, 35.66% of pregnant women had a refractive error, which can be one cause of VI [10]. Retinal change, which could result in VI in pregnant women with pregnancy-induced hypertension is about 12% [11]. The prevalence of VI among pregnant women with pre-existing medical conditions is 25 to 50% [12].Visual impairment can lead to several potential consequences throughout the life course of pregnant women. If not treated early, it will increase the risk of blindness, decrease the general well-being of pregnant women and even lead to death [13]. It can also reduce productivity, increase the risk of depression and social loneliness, lead to an inability to perform tasks alone, increase the risk of fall-associated injuries, and sexual violence and abuse [1].According to the previous studies in the globe, VI has a cross relation with the age of pregnant women [1, 14, 15], residence [1, 16], educational status [17,18,19], occupation [20, 21], gestational age (GA) [7, 15, 22], maternal parity [15, 20, 23], diabetes mellitus [24, 25], gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) [14, 20], pre-existing hypertension [12, 20], pregnancy-induced hypertension (PIH) [14, 20], family history of vision problem [26], prolonged use of smart phones and computers [27,28,29], medication history [14, 30, 31], and history of contraceptive use [14, 32].Even though VI has lots of serious consequences across the life course of pregnant women, there is no previous study in Ethiopia on this topic. Thus, this study aimed to determine the prevalence of VI and associated factors among pregnant women attending antenatal care units at selected governmental health institutions in Gondar City Administration. Knowledge on the prevalence of ocular problems among pregnant women can help clinicians and policymakers to design appropriate prevention strategies.Methods and materialsStudy design, setting, and populationAn institution-based cross-sectional study design was employed from 15 October to 15 December 2020. The study was conducted at selected governmental health institutions in Gondar city administration. Gondar is a historical city in Ethiopia located 727 km far from the capital city, Addis Ababa in the Northwest direction. It has 12 sub-cities with 12 urban and 10 rural kebeles. In the city administration, there are eight health centres (HC) and one teaching referral hospital providing antennal care (ANC) services for about 37,000 pregnant women annually. The study was conducted among pregnant women of 15–49 age groups. All pregnant women who visited ANC services of the selected health institutions were included in the study whereas, those with congenital eye problems and eye trauma during the study period were excluded.Sample size determination and sampling procedureSample size was calculated using single population proportion formula. There was no evidence within the same study area to estimate the minimum sample size. Therefore, 0.5 proportion of the population with VI, 5% margin of error, 95% confidence interval, and 10% non-response rates were considered to calculate the sample size. Hence, the total sample size became 423. A simple random sampling method was used to select health institutions for this study. Four governmental health institutions (three health centres and one referral hospital) were randomly selected by lottery methods. Study participants were recruited from selected health institutions by a systematic random sampling technique. For the better representativeness of sample size to the source population, the proportional allocation was performed for each institution (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Selection of pregnant women (sample size) visiting ANC services at governmental health institutions in Gondar city administration, Gondar, Ethiopia, 2020Full size imageStudy variablesThe dependent variable was visual impairment. The independent variables were age, residence, occupation, educational level, parity, gestational age, history of DM, GDM, history of HTN, PIH (preeclampsia and eclampsia), history of khat chewing and cigarette smoking, coffee drink, alcohol intake, medication history, and regular use of smartphones and computers or watching TV, history of contraceptive use, stress, sleep disturbance, and family history of vision problem.Operational definitionsVisual impairment: the study participants were classified as visually impaired if the presenting VA in the better eye was worse than 6/12 and unless otherwise, normal, if the presenting VA in the better eye was ≥6/12 [1, 2].Regular use of computers or television: Reading or watching computers or television at least once a day for not less than 2 h.Regular use of smartphones: Using smartphones at least once a day for more than 2 h.Sleep disturbance: Sleeping time of ≤5 h/day or sleeping time of ≥9 h/day.Medication History: Taking anti-rheumatic, anti-psychiatric & anti-thrombotic drugs in the last 30 days.Data collection tools, procedure, and quality managementA structured-interviewer-administered questionnaire consisting of socio-demographic, obstetric, and other clinically related variables was used to collect the required data. A pre-test study was conducted among 22 pregnant women outside of the study area prior to the actual data collection. The tool was modified based on the findings from the pre-test results. Some ambiguous questions and words were rewritten for a better understanding of study participants. Reliability was also checked by scale reliability coefficient and the overall Cronbach’s alpha result was 0.73, which is acceptable. Presenting visual acuity test was done in each eye separately using Snellen’s illiterate “E” chart in a well-illuminated room, hanging on a wall at a distance of 6-m. All through the test, pregnant women were sitting or standing 6 m away from the chart and ordered to cover one eye and read out loud the letters they saw with their uncovered eye. The examiner had asked them to read smaller and smaller letters until they can no longer accurately distinguish letters. This procedure was repeated for the other eye and measurements were recorded. Eye examination was performed at a private room in each health institution during the data collection period. Data were collected by three BSc Midwives recruited from three health centers and two Optometrists from the department of clinical optometry at the University of Gondar. The study participants had gotten counseling and a referral system depending on the ocular findings. The training was given to the data collectors and the supervisor about the objectives of the study, data collection techniques and ethical issues. Strict supervision was undertaken during the process of data collection.Data processing and analysis procedureThe collected data were entered into EpiData 3.1 and exported into STATA 14 for statistical analysis. Descriptive measures like median, frequency and interquartile range (IQR) were calculated. Bi-variable binary logistic regression analysis was used to select the candidate variables for the final model. Those variables with a p-value of < 0.25 in the bivariable binary logistic regression analysis were selected for multivariable binary logistic regression. Multivariable binary logistic regression analysis was executed to identify factors associated with VI. Measure of association was defined by the adjusted odds ratio (AOR) with its 95% confidence interval. In the final model, variables with a p-value ≤0.05 were declared as statistically associated with VI. Model fitness was checked by the Hosmer and Lemeshow goodness of test (at p > 0.05) and multi-collinearity was tested by a variance inflation factor (VIF).ResultsSocio-demographic characteristics of pregnant womenIn this study, four-hundred and seventeen pregnant women participated with a response rate of 98.6%. Three-hundred and ten (74.3%) of the study participants were aged 15–35 years, and the majority of them (82.7%) were from urban residence. The majority of our study participants were housewives by occupation (33.3%) and 37.2% of them had college or university level of education (Table 1).Table 1 Socio-demographic characteristics of pregnant women attending ANC units at governmental health institutions in Gondar city administration, Northwest Ethiopia, 2020 (n = 417)Full size tableLifestyle, clinical, and obstetric-related characteristicsThe majority of the study participants were nulli and primiparous (61.6%) and 64.7% of them had a gestational age of 27–42 weeks. Two-hundred and forty-five (58.7%) pregnant women had a history of regular use of smartphones for more than 2 h per day. Two-hundred and sixty-two (62.8%) of the study participants had a history of contraceptive use prior to their current pregnancy (Table 2).Table 2 Lifestyle, clinical, and obstetric-related characteristics of pregnant women attending ANC units at governmental health institutions in Gondar city administration, Northwest Ethiopia, 2020 (n = 417)Full size tablePrevalence of visual impairment and its associated factorsIn the current study, the prevalence of VI among pregnant women was 22.5% (95% CI: 18.5–26.6). Thirty (7.2%) and thirty-two (7.7%) of the study participants had moderate to severe visual impairments in their right and left eyes, respectively. Of the total pregnant women who were visually impaired, 30 (7.2%) of them had bilateral VI and 64 (15.3%) had monocular VI.Among all the variables entered into a binary logistic regression, age of the participants, residence, educational status, parity, gestational age, history of DM, GDM, history of HTN, PIH, regular use of computers or watching television and smartphones, medication history, history of contraceptive use, and sleep duration were associated with VI at p-value < 0.25. However, in the final model, only age, parity, gestational age and history of contraceptive use were significantly associated with VI at p-value ≤0.05.Pregnant women aged 31–49 years had 2.1 times (AOR = 2.1, 95% CI: 1.1–4.0) higher odds of developing VI than those aged 15–30 years. Pregnant women with the third trimester of gestational age had 2.4 times (AOR = 2.4, 95% CI: 1.3–4.5) increased odds of VI than those with first and second trimesters of gestational age. Being multi & grand multiparous among pregnant women was 2.3 times (AOR = 2.3; 95% CI: 1.2–4.6) more likely to develop VI than those who were nulli and primiparous. The odds of having VI among pregnant women who had a history of contraceptive use before their current pregnancy was 2.7 times (AOR = 2.7; 95% CI: 1.2–6.3) higher than the non-users (Table 3).Table 3 Bivariable and multivariable logistic regression analysis of factors associated with visual impairment among pregnant women attending ANC units at governmental health institutions in Gondar city administration, Northwest Ethiopia, 2020 (n = 417)Full size tableDiscussionMajor ocular changes are frequently observed in women of reproductive age groups, which occur more often during the time of their pregnancy. Most of these alterations during pregnancy are due to non-threatening physiological responses to the hormonal and metabolic adjustments to adopt the gestational product. However, there can be some critical pathological complications that may persist after the postpartum period. To the best of our knowledge, very little is known about the magnitude of VI among pregnant women in the world including Ethiopia. Thus, this research (the first of its kind in Ethiopia) tried to offer insight on the magnitude of VI and its associated factors among pregnant women attending ANC units at health institutions in Ethiopia, the case of Gondar city administration governmental health institutions.In this study, the overall prevalence of visual impairment was 22.5% (95% CI: 18.5–26.6). Age, gestational age, parity, and history of contraceptive use were significantly associated with visual impairment (p ≤ 0.05).Despite similar study population (pregnant women), the prevalence of VI among pregnant women in our study is lower than the previous studies conducted in Iran (89.2%) [8], India (65%) [33], South India (77.5%) [34], and USA (25–50%) [12]. This discrepancy might be due to the differences in study settings and study design. For example, we employed a cross-sectional study while most other studies used observational prospective studies. Another possible justification for the variation could be cultural and socio-economic characteristics of the study population, in which the population of Ethiopia, including women, have very little exposure to the potential risk factors like access to use digital devices and environmental hazards released from industries compared to the population in developed countries.The prevalence of VI among pregnant women in our study is higher than previous studies (conducted on non-pregnant women) in India (12%) [11], Sub-Saharan Africa (4.17%) [5], South Africa (10.8%) [35], and Ethiopia (4.1%) [6]. This variation might be accounted for the differences in the study population. This means that the study population in our study were only pregnant women whereas in the above compared studies, the prevalence was among all adult females (non-pregnant). Hence, the higher prevalence of VI in our study population might be due to pregnancy-associated metabolic and hormonal changes, as justified by other study [14]. During pregnancy, there is elevation of levels of estrogen and progesterone, which trigger fluid retention in the cornea. As a result, this condition leads to corneal oedema, thickness and curvature, amplified lens thickness and temporary loss of accommodation, which subsequently impairs the normal refractive power of the eye and ends up with VI [14].Other possible causes of VI in pregnant women were associated with neuro-ophthalmic and other pre-existing conditions precipitated by gravidity. During pregnancy, pre-existing diseases like Graves’ disease and Optic neuritis are exacerbated [14]. Diabetic retinopathy and central serous chorioretinopathy with an increased risk of retinal detachment can be worsened while pregnancy in women with pre-existing DM [14, 35] Neuro-ophthalmological disorders such as venous sinus thrombosis, benign intracranial hypertension, pituitary adenoma, and meningioma are more likely to be aggravated by gestational related changes in a woman during her pregnancy [14]. Pre-eclampsia and eclampsia, which may occur after 20 weeks of gestation, could result in hypertensive retinopathy, exudative retinal detachment, and cortical blindness [3, 14].Consistent with the studies conducted in South Africa [35], Taiwan [36], Ghana [37], and Ethiopia [24], in this study, those women aged 31–49 years had higher odds of VI. This could be due to the increased risk of age-related diseases of the eye following ageing. As age increases, the nature and functions of the lens and cornea gradually decrease and this strongly affects the normal focusing of the light on the retina [14].The finding of our study revealed that VI was more likely to occur in the women during the third trimester of pregnancy. This result is consistent with other studies in Turkey [38], India [34], Iran [39], and Nigeria [7, 22]. The possible reason for this incident could be due to the hormonal and metabolic changes as a result of gestational stress, which may lead to corneal thickness and alterations in the refractive power of the lens. These ocular changes in turn bring about VI among pregnant women [14].Multi and grand-multiparous pregnant women were more liable to develop VI than those who were nulli and primiparous. This finding is supported by a previous study in the USA [15], Croatia [23], and China [20]. This event is probably accounted for the repeated ocular alteration in the succeeding gravidity of mothers who had a greater number of parity.The odds of developing VI among pregnant women who had a history of contraceptive use prior to their current pregnancy was found to be higher than their counterparts. This finding is in agreement with studies in Iran [40], Germany [14], Egypt [32], and Greece [41]. This can be due to the fact that using contraceptives (oral and injectable) for family planning methods will cause dry eye symptoms related to reduced lipid synthesis, corneal oedema, and a significant increase in the central corneal thickness associated with the hormonal effects (estrogen and progesterone) [42, 43]. Occlusion of the central retinal artery, intraocular haemorrhages, macular or disc oedema, and acute ischemic optic neuropathy are also reported in women using contraceptive pills which may impair the normal visual pathway [42].A reasonably high response rate (98.6%) could be the strength of our study. This study has also epidemiological data on the prevalence of visual impairment among pregnant women, which is the first institution-based study, not yet reported in Ethiopia. However, our study was based on an institution based cross-sectional study design, which can’t show the real cause-effect relationship between independent variables and VI, inferring that, we are not sure about the presence of VI before pregnancy and whether it is worsened or improved by the pregnancy itself. Another limitation of our study was that we didn’t collect information regarding the treatment status of the study participants with VI (whether they were actually treated or planned to be treated). Lastly, we didn’t identify the possible causes of VI because of limited resources.ConclusionThe magnitude of VI among pregnant women was high. It was significantly associated with maternal age of 31–49 years, gestational age in the 3rd trimester, multi & grand multiparous women, and those who had a history of contraceptive use before the current pregnancy. Since the prevalence of VI is high in our study, it requires a routine screening and evaluation of pregnant women at antenatal care visits. Further analytical investigations of visual changes, particularly as a result of pregnancy, could also be warranted. Availability of data and materials All pertinent data are comprised in the manuscript. The dataset is available and can be obtained from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. AbbreviationsANC: antenatal care AOR: Adjusted odds ratio CI: confidence interval DM: diabetes mellitus GDM: gestational diabetes mellitus PIH: pregnancy-induced hypertension PVA: presenting visual acuity VI: Visual Impairment ReferencesOrganization WH. World report on vision. 2019. Google Scholar Stevens GA, White RA, Flaxman SR, Price H, Jonas JB, Keeffe J, et al. Global prevalence of vision impairment and blindness: magnitude and temporal trends, 1990–2010. Ophthalmology. 2013;120(12):2377–84.Article Google Scholar Ackland P, Resnikoff S, Bourne R. World blindness and visual impairment: despite many successes, the problem is growing. Community Eye Health. 2017;30(100):71.PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Bourne RR, Flaxman SR, Braithwaite T, Cicinelli MV, Das A, Jonas JB, et al. Magnitude, temporal trends, and projections of the global prevalence of blindness and distance and near vision impairment: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Glob Health. 2017;5(9):e888–e97.Article Google Scholar Naidoo K, Kempen JH, Gichuhi S, Braithwaite T, Casson RJ, Cicinelli MV, et al. Prevalence and causes of vision loss in sub-Saharan Africa in 2015: magnitude, temporal trends and projections. Br J Ophthalmol. 2020;104(12):1658–68.Article Google Scholar Berhane Y, Worku A, Bejiga A, Adamu L, Alemayehu W, Bedri A, et al. National survey on blindness, low vision and trachoma in Ethiopia: methods and study clusters profile. Ethiop J Health Dev. 2007;21(3):185–203. Google Scholar Nkiru ZN, Obiekwe O, Lilian O, Daniel CN, Uchenna IN, Rich U. Visual acuity and refractive changes among pregnant women in Enugu, Southeast Nigeria. Journal of Family Medicine and Primary Care. 2018;7(5):1037.PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Mehdizadehkashi K, Chaichian S, Mehdizadehkashi A, Jafarzadepour E, Tamannaie Z, Moazzami B, et al. Visual acuity changes during pregnancy and postpartum: a cross-sectional study in Iran. J Pregnancy. 2014;2014.Rezai S, LoBue S, LoBue T, Giovane R, Carney M. Ophthalmic complications and ocular changes in pregnancy-a review. Obstet Gynecol Int J. 2016;4(1):00093.Article Google Scholar Diress M, Yeshaw Y, Bantihun M, Dagnew B, Ambelu A, Seid MA, et al. Refractive error and its associated factors among pregnant women attending antenatal care unit at the University of Gondar Comprehensive Specialized Hospital, Northwest Ethiopia. PLoS ONE. 2021;16(2):e0246174.Article CAS Google Scholar Shah AP, Lune AA, Magdum RM, Deshpande H, Shah AP, Bhavsar D. Retinal changes in pregnancy-induced hypertension. Medical Journal of Dr DY Patil University. 2015;8(3):304.Article Google Scholar Lupton SJ, Chiu CL, Hodgson LA, Tooher J, Lujic S, Ogle R, et al. Temporal changes in retinal microvascular caliber and blood pressure during pregnancy. Hypertension. 2013;61(4):880–5.Article CAS Google Scholar Sabanayagam C, Cheng C-Y. Global causes of vision loss in 2015: are we on track to achieve the vision 2020 target? Lancet Glob Health. 2017;5(12):e1164–e5.Article Google Scholar Mackensen F, Paulus WE, Max R, Ness T. Ocular changes during pregnancy. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2014;111(33–34):567.PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Luke B, Brown MB. Elevated risks of pregnancy complications and adverse outcomes with increasing maternal age. Hum Reprod. 2007;22(5):1264–72.Article Google Scholar Rai BB, Ashby RS, French AN, Maddess T. Rural-urban differences in myopia prevalence among myopes presenting to Bhutanese retinal clinical services: a 3-year national study. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2021;259(3):613–21.Article Google Scholar Gilbert CE, Ellwein LB, Group RESiCS. Prevalence and causes of functional low vision in school-age children: results from standardized population surveys in Asia, Africa, and Latin America. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2008;49(3):877–881.Ilhan C. Investigation of the refractive errors in terms of education level in central Anatolian population. EC Ophthalmology. 2018;9:308–11. Google Scholar Mountjoy E, Davies NM, Plotnikov D, Smith GD, Rodriguez S, Williams CE, et al. Education and myopia: assessing the direction of causality by mendelian randomisation. BMJ. 2018;361.Luo J, Fan C, Luo M, Fang J, Zhou S, Zhang F. Pregnancy complications among nulliparous and multiparous women with advanced maternal age: a community-based prospective cohort study in China. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2020;20(1):1–9.Article Google Scholar Bazeer S, Jansonius N, Snieder H, Hammond C, Vehof J. The relationship between occupation and dry eye. The Ocular Surface. 2019;17(3):484–90.Article Google Scholar Ebeigbe J, Ebeigbe P, Ighoroje A. Ocular changes in pregnant Nigerian women. Niger J Clin Pract. 2012;15(3):298–301.Article CAS Google Scholar Lee A, Mitchell P, Rochtchina E, Healey P. Female reproductive factors and open angle glaucoma: the Blue Mountains eye study. Br J Ophthalmol. 2003;87(11):1324–8.Article CAS Google Scholar Assefa NL, Admas AW, Adimasu NF. Prevalence and associated factors of visual impairment among adults at Debre Berhan town, north Shewa, Ethiopia. BMC Ophthalmology. 2020;20(1):1–8.Article Google Scholar Morrison JL, Hodgson LA, Lim LL, Al-Qureshi S. Diabetic retinopathy in pregnancy: a review. Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2016;44(4):321–34.Article Google Scholar Abebe H, Wagnew F, Zeleke H, Tefera B, Tesfa S, Fetene T. Magnitude of visual impairment and associated factors among patients attending ophthalmic clinics of Debre Markos referral hospital, north West Ethiopia. BMC Ophthalmol. 2021;21(1):1–10.Article Google Scholar Guan H, Yu NN, Wang H, Boswell M, Shi Y, Rozelle S, et al. Impact of various types of near work and time spent outdoors at different times of day on visual acuity and refractive error among Chinese school-going children. PLoS One. 2019;14(4):e0215827.Article CAS Google Scholar Rosenfield M. Computer vision syndrome (aka digital eye strain). Optometry. 2016;17(1):1–10. Google Scholar Mylona I, Deres ES, Dere G-DS, Tsinopoulos I, Glynatsis M. The impact of internet and videogaming addiction on adolescent vision: a review of the literature. Front Public Health. 2020;8:63.Article Google Scholar Fernandes TMP, Silverstein SM, Butler PD, Kéri S, Santos LG, Nogueira RL, et al. Color vision impairments in schizophrenia and the role of antipsychotic medication type. Schizophr Res. 2019;204:162–70.Article Google Scholar Kaimbo D. Transient drug-induced myopia. SAJ Case Rep. 2014;1(1):105. Google Scholar Shaaban YM, Badran TAF. The effect of oral contraceptive pills on the macula, the retinal nerve fiber layer, the ganglion cell layer and the choroidal thickness. BMC Ophthalmol. 2019;19(1):1–6.Article Google Scholar Balasubramanian K, Mathiyalagan S, Nagarajan G. A prospective study of changes in the refractive system of eye during pregnancy. Int J Sci Study. 2017;5(4):89–92. Google Scholar Usha C, Pramila B, Kalaiselvi B. A study on changes in the central corneal thickness among pregnant mothers in South India. Indian J Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2019;5(2):219–21.Article Google Scholar Addo EK, Akuffo KO, Sewpaul R, Dukhi N, Agyei-Manu E, Asare AK, et al. Prevalence and associated factors of vision loss in the south African National Health and nutrition examination survey (SANHANES-1). BMC Ophthalmol. 2021;21(1):1–15.Article Google Scholar Wang W-L, Chen N, Sheu M-M, Wang J-H, Hsu W-L, Hu Y-J. The prevalence and risk factors of visual impairment among the elderly in eastern Taiwan. Kaohsiung J Med Sci. 2016;32(9):475–81.Article CAS Google Scholar Nuertey BD, Amissah-Arthur KN, Addai J, Adongo V, Nuertey AD, Kabutey C, et al. Prevalence, causes, and factors associated with visual impairment and blindness among registered pensioners in Ghana. J Ophthalmol. 2019;2019.Efe YK, Ugurbas SC, Alpay A, Ugurbas SH. The course of corneal and intraocular pressure changes during pregnancy. Can J Ophthalmol. 2012;47(2):150–4.Article Google Scholar Mehdizadehkashi K, Chaichian S, Mehdizadehkashi A, Jafarzadepour E, Tamannaie Z, Moazzami B, et al. Corrigendum to “visual acuity changes during pregnancy and postpartum: a cross-sectional study in Iran”. J Pregnancy. 2018;2018.Naderan M. Ocular changes during pregnancy. J Curr Ophthalmol. 2018;30(3):202–10.Article Google Scholar Moschos MM, Nitoda E. The impact of combined oral contraceptives on ocular tissues: a review of ocular effects. Int J Ophthalmol. 2017;10(10):1604.PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Westhoff CL, Pike MC. Hormonal contraception and breast cancer. Contraception. 2018;98(3):171–3.Article CAS Google Scholar Kurtul BE, Inal B, Ozer PA, Kabatas EU. Impact of oral contraceptive pills on central corneal thickness in young women. Indian J Pharmacol. 2016;48(6):665.Article CAS Google Scholar World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki: ethical principles for medical research involving human subjects. The Journal of the American College of Dentists. 2014;81(3):14–8.Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe would like to acknowledge the study participants, data collectors, and supervisors for their unlimited contributions to this paperwork. We would also like to thank the staff members of the Department of Optometry at the University of Gondar Comprehensive and Specialized Hospital for their provision of data collection tools and involvement in the data collection.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsDepartment of Human Physiology, School of Medicine, University of Gondar, P. O. Box 196, Gondar, EthiopiaMengistie Diress, Yitayeh Belsti, Mihret Getnet, Baye Dagnew, Yonas Akalu & Yibeltal Yismaw GelaDepartment of Optometry, School of Medicine, University of Gondar, Gondar, EthiopiaSofonias Addis FekaduUnit of Human Physiology, Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Health Science, Debre Tabor University, Debre Tabor, EthiopiaMohammed Abdu SeidAuthorsMengistie DiressView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYitayeh BelstiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMihret GetnetView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSofonias Addis FekaduView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarBaye DagnewView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYonas AkaluView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMohammed Abdu SeidView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYibeltal Yismaw GelaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsMD: designed the study, involved in data entry, cleaning and analysis and prepared the first draft of the manuscript.SAF, BD, YB, MAS, MG, YA, and YYG: involved in designing the study, supervising the data collection process, data analysis, and reviewing of the manuscript. All authors reviewed and approved the final manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Mengistie Diress.Ethics declarations Ethical approval and consent to participate Prior to study commencement, all the ethical issues were secured. Ethical clearance was gotten from the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of the University of Gondar. A permission letter was obtained from Gondar city administration health office before data collection. After the study participants were adequately briefed about the study, written informed consent was taken from each study participant whose age was above 16 years old and from parents/guardians of the study participants whose age was below 16 years old. Privacy and confidentiality of information were kept properly. All methods were performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations of the Declaration of Helsinki [44]. Study participants who had mild VI during the time of data collection were counselled and those with severe and complicated VI were referred to the Department of Ophthalmology at the University of Gondar Comprehensive Specialized Hospital for better diagnosis and management. Consent for publication Not applicable. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher’s NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data. Reprints and PermissionsAbout this articleCite this articleDiress, M., Belsti, Y., Getnet, M. et al. Visual impairment and associated factors among pregnant women attending antenatal care units at health institutions in Gondar City Administration, Northwest Ethiopia. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 21, 824 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12884-021-04302-6Download citationReceived: 18 May 2021Accepted: 29 November 2021Published: 13 December 2021DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12884-021-04302-6Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative KeywordsVisual impairmentPresenting visual acuityPregnancyEthiopia Download PDF Advertisement BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth ISSN: 1471-2393 Contact us Submission enquiries: bmcpregnancyandchildbirth@biomedcentral.com General enquiries: ORSupport@springernature.com Read more on our blogs Receive BMC newsletters Manage article alerts Language editing for authors Scientific editing for authors Policies Accessibility Press center Support and Contact Leave feedback Careers Follow BMC BMC Twitter page BMC Facebook page BMC Weibo page By using this website, you agree to our Terms and Conditions, Your US state privacy rights, Privacy statement and Cookies policy. Your privacy choices/Manage cookies we use in the preference centre. © 2023 BioMed Central Ltd unless otherwise stated. Part of Springer Nature.