Medscape Registration This site is intended for healthcare professionals News & Perspective Drugs & Diseases CME & Education Academy Video Decision Point Edition: English Medscape English Deutsch Español Français Português UKNew Univadis Français NewItaliano New Log In Sign Up It's Free! English Edition Medscape English Deutsch Español Français Português UKNew Univadis Français NewItaliano New X Univadis from Medscape Register Log In No Results No Results News & Perspective Drugs & Diseases CME & Education Academy Video Decision Point close Please confirm that you would like to log out of Medscape. If you log out, you will be required to enter your username and password the next time you visit. Log out Cancel https://profreg.medscape.com/px/getpracticeprofile.do?method=getProfessionalProfile&urlCache=aHR0cHM6Ly9lbWVkaWNpbmUubWVkc2NhcGUuY29tL2FydGljbGUvNDUyNjA0LW92ZXJ2aWV3 processing.... Drugs & Diseases > Obstetrics & Gynecology Urinary Tract Infections in Pregnancy Updated: Jul 13, 2023 Author: Raisa O Platte, MD, PhD; Chief Editor: Edward David Kim, MD, FACS more... 55 Share Print Feedback Close Facebook Twitter LinkedIn WhatsApp Email Sections Urinary Tract Infections in Pregnancy Sections Urinary Tract Infections in Pregnancy Overview Practice Essentials Pathophysiology Etiology Epidemiology Prognosis Show All Presentation History Physical Examination Complications Show All DDx Workup Approach Considerations Blood Studies Urine Studies Renal Ultrasonography and Intravenous Pyelography Histologic Findings Show All Treatment Medication Medication Summary Antibiotics Show All Questions & Answers Media Gallery Tables References Overview Practice Essentials Pregnancy causes numerous changes in the woman’s body that increase the likelihood of urinary tract infections (UTIs). Hormonal and mechanical changes can promote urinary stasis and vesicoureteral reflux. These changes, along with an already short urethra (approximately 3-4 cm in females) and difficulty with hygiene due to a distended pregnant belly, help make UTIs the most common bacterial infections during pregnancy. Untreated bacteruria during pregnancy is associated with risks to both the fetus and the mother, including pyelonephritis, preterm birth, low birth weight, and increased perinatal mortality. In general, pregnant patients are considered immunocompromised UTI hosts because of the physiologic changes associated with pregnancy (see Pathophysiology). These changes increase the risk of serious infectious complications from symptomatic and asymptomatic urinary infections even in healthy pregnant women. (See Urinary Tract Infection in Females.) Oral antibiotics are the treatment of choice for asymptomatic bacteriuria and cystitis. The standard course of treatment for pyelonephritis is hospital admission and intravenous antibiotics. Antibiotic prophylaxis is indicated in some cases (see Treatment). Patients treated for three or more episodes of cystitis or one episode of pyelonephritis during pregnancy should be continued on daily prophylactic antibiotics for the duration of their pregnancy. Annual health costs for UTI exceed $1 billion. Although the condition-specific cost of asymptomatic bacteriuria or UTI in pregnancy is unknown, screening for these conditions in pregnant women is cost-effective, compared with treating UTI and pyelonephritis without screening. Goals for future research include targeting low-income groups and women in developing countries for screening and early treatment, as well as determining whether a causal relation exists between maternal UTI and childhood neurologic consequences. For patient education information, see the following: Urinary Tract Infection (UTI) Urinary Tract Infections in Pregnancy What If I Get a UTI While I’m Pregnant? Definitions of key terms Urinary tract infection UTI is defined as the presence of at least 100,000 organisms per milliliter of urine in an asymptomatic patient, or as more than 100 organisms/mL of urine with accompanying pyuria (> 7 white blood cells [WBCs]/mL) in a symptomatic patient. A diagnosis of UTI should be supported by a positive culture for a uropathogen, particularly in patients with vague symptoms. [1] Asymptomatic bacteriuria Asymptomatic bacteriuria is commonly defined as the presence of more than 100,000 organisms/mL in 2 consecutive urine samples in the absence of declared symptoms. Untreated asymptomatic bacteriuria is a risk factor for acute cystitis (40%) and pyelonephritis (25-30%) in pregnancy. This usually occurs in early pregnancy. Risk factors include prior UTIs, pre-existing diabetes, increased parity, and low socioeconomic status. Cystitis Acute cystitis involves only the lower urinary tract; it is characterized by inflammation of the bladder as a result of bacterial or nonbacterial causes (eg, radiation or viral infection). Acute cystitis develops in approximately 1- 2% of pregnant patients, of whom 60% have a negative result on initial screening. Signs and symptoms include hematuria, dysuria, suprapubic discomfort, frequency, urgency, and nocturia. These symptoms are often difficult to distinguish from those due to pregnancy itself. Acute cystitis is complicated by upper urinary tract disease (ie, pyelonephritis) in 15-50% of cases. Acute pyelonephritis Pyelonephritis is the most common urinary tract complication in pregnant women, occurring in approximately 0.5-2% of all pregnancies. Acute pyelonephritis is characterized by fever, flank pain, and tenderness in addition to significant bacteriuria. Other symptoms may include nausea, vomiting, frequency, urgency, and dysuria. Most cases of pyelonephritis occur in the second and third trimester. Additional risk factors for complicated UTI in pregnancy include the following [2] : Immunosuppression Pre-existing diabetes Sickle cell anemia Neurogenic bladder Recurrent or persistent UTIs before pregnancy Tobacco use Age < 20 years Late presentation for prenatal care Next: Pathophysiology Pathophysiology Infections result from ascending colonization of the urinary tract, primarily by existing vaginal, perineal, and fecal flora. Various maternal physiologic and anatomic factors predispose to ascending infection. Such factors include urinary retention caused by the weight of the enlarging uterus on the bladder; urinary stasis due to progesterone-induced ureteral smooth muscle relaxation; and blood-volume expansion, which increases the glomerular filtration rate and urinary output. Loss of ureteral tone combined with increased urinary tract volume results in urinary stasis, which can lead to dilatation of the ureters, renal pelvis, and calyces. [3] Urinary stasis can serve as a reservoir for bacteria. Urinary stasis and the presence of vesicoureteral reflux predispose some women to acute pyelonephritis. [4] Calyceal and ureteral dilatation are more common on the right side; in up to 80% of cases, the dilatation is localized to the right. The degree of calyceal dilatation is also more pronounced on the right than the left (average 15 mm vs 5 mm). This dilatation appears to begin by about 10 weeks’ gestation and increases throughout pregnancy, resolving approximately 6-12 weeks postpartum. This is underscored by the distribution of cases of pyelonephritis during pregnancy: 2% during the first trimester, 52% during the second trimester, and 46% in the third trimester. Glucosuria and an increase in levels of urinary amino acids (aminoaciduria) during pregnancy are additional factors that lead to UTI. In many cases, glucose excretion increases during pregnancy over nonpregnant values of 100 mg/day. Glycosuria is due to impaired glucose reabsorption by the proximal collecting tubule and loop of Henle. The fractional excretion of alanine, glycine, histidine, serine, and threonine is increased throughout pregnancy. Levels of cystine, leucine, lysine, phenylalanine, taurine, and tyrosine are elevated in the first half of pregnancy but return to reference range levels by the second half. The mechanism of selective aminoaciduria is unknown, although its presence has been postulated to affect the adherence of Escherichia coli to the urothelium. Previous Next: Pathophysiology Etiology Pathogens E coli is the most common cause of UTI, accounting for approximately 70-80% of cases in pregnancy. It originates from fecal flora colonizing the periurethral area, causing an ascending infection. Other pathogens include the following [5] : Klebsiella pneumoniae (5%) Proteus mirabilis (5%) Enterobacter species (3%) Staphylococcus saprophyticus (3%) Group B beta-hemolytic Streptococcus (GBS; 2-5%) Proteus species (2%) Gram-positive organisms, particularly Enterococcus faecalis and GBS, are clinically important pathogens. They cause up to 10% of UTIs in pregnant women. Infection with S saprophyticus,an aggressive community-acquired organism, can cause upper urinary tract disease, and this infection is more likely to be persistent or recurrent. Urea-splitting bacteria, including Proteus, Klebsiella, Pseudomonas, and coagulase-negative Staphylococcus,alkalinize the urine and may be associated with struvite stones. Chlamydial infections are associated with sterile pyuria and account for more than 30% of atypical pathogens. GBS colonization has important implications during pregnancy. Intrapartum transmission that leads to neonatal GBS infection can cause pneumonia, meningitis, sepsis, and death. Current guidelines recommend universal vaginal and rectal screening in all pregnant women at 35-37 weeks’ gestation rather than treatment based on risk factors. Incidental documentation of GBS bacteriuria suggests a higher colonization count than is revealed by a screening vaginal or rectal culture. Beta-streptococcal colonization in the urine warrants immediate treatment and antibiotic prophylaxis when the patient presents in labor. Whether beta streptococci are associated with preterm labor is controversial. A systemic review and meta-analysis found no association between GBS colonization and preterm delivery. In cases where preterm delivery occurred, however, there was an increased risk of subsequent GBS colonization. [6] Patient factors Several patient-level factors are associated with an increased frequency of bacteriuria during pregnancy. Compared with nonindigent patients, indigent patients have a 5-fold increased incidence of bacteriuria. The risk is doubled in women with sickle cell trait. Other risk factors for bacteriuria include the following: Pre-existing diabetes mellitus [7] Neurogenic bladder retention History of vesicoureteral reflux (treated or untreated) [8] Kidney transplantation [9] Increased parity History of previous UTIs A study that compared pregnant women with and without a positive urine culture found that the following factors were associated with increased odds of UTI [10] : Intercourse ≥3x/week (odds ratio [OR] 5.62) Recent UTI (OR = 3.27) Not washing genitals precoitus (OR = 2.16) Not washing genitals postcoitus (OR = 2.89) Not urinating postcoitus (OR = 8.62) Washing genitals from back to front (OR = 2.96) Cesarean delivery Cesarean delivery is associated with UTI (increasing the likelihood 2.7-fold), but this association may be confounded by bladder catheterization or prolonged rupture of membranes (PROM). The incidence of symptomatic UTI is 9.3%, and that of asymptomatic bacteriuria is 7.6%. Orthotopic continent urinary diversion Many women who, in the past, would have been counseled against pregnancy are now attempting pregnancy. In orthotopic continent diversion (OCD), an ileal-ascending colon conduit is made (OCD, Kock pouch) and reattached to the in situ urethra (OCD) or a continent abdominal stoma (Kock pouch). Typical candidates are patients born with congenital exstrophy of the bladder in whom primary reconstruction has failed. Recurrent UTI and hydronephrosis are common because of outflow obstruction of the orthotopic stoma secondary to uterine compression or uterine prolapse. Indwelling catheterization of the urethra or continent stoma may be necessary, particularly during the later stages of pregnancy. In rare cases, a percutaneous nephrostomy tube or antegrade passage of a ureteral stent may be indicated. Previous Next: Pathophysiology Epidemiology United States statistics The frequency of urinary tract infection (UTI) in pregnant women (0.3-1.3%) is similar to that in non-pregnant women. [11] However, recurrent bacteruria is more common in pregnant women than non-pregnant women. Changes in coital patterns (eg, position, frequency, postcoital antibiotics) can offset recurrence in at-risk individuals. Overall, UTIs are 14 times more frequent in women than in men. This difference is attributed to the following factors: The urethra is shorter in women, so perineal and fecal flora have a shorter distance to travel. In women, the lower third of the urethra is continually contaminated with pathogens from the vagina and the rectum. Women tend not to empty their bladders as completely as men do. female urogenital system is exposed to bacteria during intercourse. A difference between pregnant and nonpregnant women is that the prevalence of asymptomatic bacteriuria in pregnant women is 2.5-11%, as opposed to 3-8% in nonpregnant women. In as many as 35% of these cases, bacteriuria may progress to symptomatic upper UTI or pyelonephritis; this rate is significantly higher than that seen in nonpregnant women [12] International statistics Versi et al described a higher prevalence of bacteriuria in pregnant white women (6.3%) than in pregnant Bangladeshi women (2%). [13] Pregnancies that resulted in preterm deliveries were strongly associated with bacteriuria in white women; this association was not observed in Bangladeshi women. The authors hypothesized that the difference could be due to variation in hygiene practices and clothing. A large population-based study of nearly 200,000 pregnant Israeli women demonstrated a 2.5% rate of asymptomatic bacteriuria [14] and a 2.3% rate of symptomatic UTI. [15] In this population, asymptomatic bacteriuria was found to have an association with multiple pregnancy complications, including hypertension, diabetes, intrauterine growth retardation, prolonged hospitalization, and preterm labor. The authors suggested that these findings may be a marker for intensity of prenatal care rather than a specific causal effect of the urinary infection. [14] Additionally, their follow-up study examining women with symptomatic UTI showed a clear association between UTI and low birth weight and preterm delivery, a finding consistent with those of multiple previous investigations. [15] Age- and race-related demographics The prevalence of UTI during pregnancy increases with maternal age. A retrospective analysis of 24,000 births found the prevalence of UTI during pregnancy to be 28.7% in whites and Asians, 30.1% in blacks, and 41.1% in Hispanics. When socioeconomic status is controlled for, no significant interracial differences seem to exist. A survey-based analysis of self-reported UTI found similar trends. This study also considered Native American women and found the highest prevalence of UTI in this population (24.2%) as compared with Asian (10.3%), white (16.6%), Hispanic (18.3%), and black (20.3%) women. [16] UTI is associated with preterm delivery in persons of all races. The adjusted odds ratio in infants with very low birth weight is 2.8 in blacks and 5.6 in whites, adjusted for parity, body mass index, maternal age, marital status, cigarette smoking, education, and prenatal care. The overall relative risk of bacteriuria in blacks or whites is estimated at 1.5-5, and the relative risk of preterm birth in women with bacteriuria is 1.8-2.3. Previous Next: Pathophysiology Prognosis In most cases of bacteriuria and urinary tract infection (UTI) in pregnancy, the prognosis is excellent. The majority of long-term sequelae are due to complications associated with septic shock, respiratory failure, and hypotensive hypoxia (ie, extremity gangrene). Maternal UTI has few direct fetal sequelae because fetal bloodstream infection is rare; however, uterine hypoperfusion due to maternal dehydration, maternal anemia, and direct bacterial endotoxin damage to the placental vasculature may cause fetal cerebral hypoperfusion. Untreated upper UTIs are associated with low birth weight, prematurity, premature labor, hypertension, preeclampsia, maternal anemia, and amnionitis. [17, 18] A retrospective population-based study by Mazor-Dray et al showed that UTI during pregnancy is independently associated with intrauterine growth restriction, preeclampsia, preterm delivery, and cesarean delivery, but not with increased rates of perinatal mortality. [14] A review of almost 3 million California live born infants found that UTI in pregnancy was associated with elevated risk of preterm birth, regardless of the trimester in which the UTI occurred or whether the woman received antibiotic treatment. [19] Preeclampsia A meta-analysis of 19 studies demonstrated an increased odds (1.31-fold) of preeclampsia in women with any UTI during pregnancy versus those without UTI. [18] A multicenter retrospective study found that UTI in pregnancy, particularly in the third trimester, is strongly associated with preeclampsia. Rates of preeclampsia in patients with UTI compared with those without reported UTI were 31.1% vs 7.8%, respectively (P < 0.001). The authors hypothesize that the increased maternal inflammatory burden from UTI enhances the risk of preeclampsia. [20] Previous Clinical Presentation References Kalinderi K, Delkos D, Kalinderis M, Athanasiadis A, Kalogiannidis I. Urinary tract infection during pregnancy: current concepts on a common multifaceted problem. J Obstet Gynaecol. 2018 May. 38 (4):448-453. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Wing DA, Fassett MJ, Getahun D. Acute pyelonephritis in pregnancy: an 18-year retrospective analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2014 Mar. 210 (3):219.e1-6. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Habak PJ, Griggs, Jr RP. Urinary Tract Infection in Pregnancy. 2023 Jan. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. [Full Text]. Beydoun SN. Morphologic changes in the renal tract in pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol. 1985 Jun. 28 (2):249-56. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Glaser AP, Schaeffer AJ. Urinary Tract Infection and Bacteriuria in Pregnancy. Urol Clin North Am. 2015 Nov. 42 (4):547-60. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Valkenburg-van den Berg AW, Sprij AJ, Dekker FW, Dörr PJ, Kanhai HH. Association between colonization with Group B Streptococcus and preterm delivery: a systematic review. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2009. 88 (9):958-67. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Alvarez JR, Fechner AJ, Williams SF, Ganesh VL, Apuzzio JJ. Asymptomatic bacteriuria in pregestational diabetic pregnancies and the role of group B streptococcus. Am J Perinatol. 2010 Mar. 27(3):231-4. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Hollowell JG. Outcome of pregnancy in women with a history of vesico-ureteric reflux. BJU Int. 2008 Sep. 102(7):780-4. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Ghafari A, Sanadgol H. Pregnancy after renal transplantation: ten-year single-center experience. Transplant Proc. 2008 Jan-Feb. 40(1):251-2. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Amiri FN, Rooshan MH, Ahmady MH, Soliamani MJ. Hygiene practices and sexual activity associated with urinary tract infection in pregnant women. East Mediterr Health J. 2009 Jan-Feb. 15 (1):104-10. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. [Full Text]. [Guideline] Guidelines for Perinatal Care. AAP, Elk Grove Village, IL; ACOG, Washington DC: American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists; 2017. 8th ed: Hooton TM. Clinical practice. Uncomplicated urinary tract infection. N Engl J Med. 2012 Mar 15. 366 (11):1028-37. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Versi E, Chia P, Griffiths DJ, Harlow BL. Bacteriuria in pregnancy: a comparison of Bangladeshi and Caucasian women. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct. 1997. 8(1):8-12. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Mazor-Dray E, Levy A, Schlaeffer F, Sheiner E. Maternal urinary tract infection: is it independently associated with adverse pregnancy outcome?. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2009 Feb. 22(2):124-8. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Sheiner E, Mazor-Drey E, Levy A. Asymptomatic bacteriuria during pregnancy. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2009 May. 22(5):423-7. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Whitehead NS, Callaghan W, Johnson C, Williams L. Racial, ethnic, and economic disparities in the prevalence of pregnancy complications. Matern Child Health J. 2009 Mar. 13(2):198-205. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Hill JB, Sheffield JS, McIntire DD, Wendel GD Jr. Acute pyelonephritis in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol. 2005 Jan. 105(1):18-23. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Yan L, Jin Y, Hang H, Yan B. The association between urinary tract infection during pregnancy and preeclampsia: A meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltimore). 2018 Sep. 97 (36):e12192. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. [Full Text]. Baer RJ, Nidey N, Bandoli G, Chambers BD, Chambers CD, Feuer S, et al. Risk of Early Birth among Women with a Urinary Tract Infection: A Retrospective Cohort Study. AJP Rep. 2021 Jan. 11 (1):e5-e14. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. [Full Text]. Easter SR, Cantonwine DE, Zera CA, Lim KH, Parry SI, McElrath TF. Urinary tract infection during pregnancy, angiogenic factor profiles, and risk of preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2016 Mar. 214 (3):387.e1-7. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Cunningham FG, Lucas MJ. Urinary tract infections complicating pregnancy. Baillieres Clin Obstet Gynaecol. 1994 Jun. 8 (2):353-73. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Olson E, Gupta K, Van Der Pol B, Galbraith JW, Geisler WM. Mycoplasma genitalium infection in women reporting dysuria: A pilot study and review of the literature. Int J STD AIDS. 2021 Jul 6. 9564624211030040. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Albright CM, Ali TN, Lopes V, Rouse DJ, Anderson BL. Lactic acid measurement to identify risk of morbidity from sepsis in pregnancy. Am J Perinatol. 2015 Apr. 32 (5):481-6. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. [Guideline] US Preventive Services Task Force, Owens DK, Davidson KW, Krist AH, Barry MJ, Cabana M, et al. Screening for Asymptomatic Bacteriuria in Adults: US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. JAMA. 2019 Sep 24. 322 (12):1188-1194. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. [Full Text]. [Guideline] Nicolle LE, Gupta K, Bradley SF, Colgan R, DeMuri GP, Drekonja D, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Asymptomatic Bacteriuria: 2019 Update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 2019 May 2. 68 (10):e83-e110. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Lifshitz E, Kramer L. Outpatient urine culture: does collection technique matter?. Arch Intern Med. 2000 Sep 11. 160 (16):2537-40. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Kodikara H, Seneviratne H, Kaluarachchi A, Corea E. Diagnostic accuracy of nitrite dipstick testing for the detection of bacteriuria of pregnancy. Public Health. 2009 May. 123(5):393-4. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Ansaldi Y, Martinez de Tejada Weber B. Urinary tract infections in pregnancy. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2022 Aug 27. 28(3):581-91. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Vazquez JC, Abalos E. Treatments for symptomatic urinary tract infections during pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011 Jan 19. CD002256. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Widmer M, Lopez I, Gülmezoglu AM, Mignini L, Roganti A. Duration of treatment for asymptomatic bacteriuria during pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015 Nov 11. (12):CD000491. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Millar LK, Wing DA, Paul RH, Grimes DA. Outpatient treatment of pyelonephritis in pregnancy: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol. 1995 Oct. 86(4 Pt 1):560-4. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Ailes EC, Gilboa SM, Gill SK, Broussard CS, Crider KS, Berry RJ, et al. Association between antibiotic use among pregnant women with urinary tract infections in the first trimester and birth defects, National Birth Defects Prevention Study 1997 to 2011. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2016 Nov. 106 (11):940-949. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. [Full Text]. Committee on Obstetric Practice. Committee Opinion No. 717: Sulfonamides, Nitrofurantoin, and Risk of Birth Defects. Obstet Gynecol. 2017 Sep. 130 (3):e150-e152. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Bozkurt Y, Penbegul N, Soylemez H, Atar M, Sancaktutar AA, Yildirim K, et al. The efficacy and safety of ureteroscopy for ureteral calculi in pregnancy: our experience in 32 patients. Urol Res. 2012 Jan 4. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. [Guideline] Nicolle LE, Bradley S, Colgan R, Rice JC, Schaeffer A, Hooton TM. Infectious Diseases Society of America guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of asymptomatic bacteriuria in adults. Clin Infect Dis. 2005 Mar 1. 40(5):643-54. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Lichtenberger P, Hooton TM. Antimicrobial prophylaxis in women with recurrent urinary tract infections. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2011 Dec. 38 Suppl:36-41. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Sun Y, Vestergaard M, Christensen J, Nahmias AJ, Olsen J. Prenatal exposure to maternal infections and epilepsy in childhood: a population-based cohort study. Pediatrics. 2008 May. 121(5):e1100-7. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Kazemier BM, Koningstein FN, Schneeberger C, Ott A, Bossuyt PM, de Miranda E, et al. Maternal and neonatal consequences of treated and untreated asymptomatic bacteriuria in pregnancy: a prospective cohort study with an embedded randomised controlled trial. Lancet Infect Dis. 2015 Nov. 15 (11):1324-33. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Easter SR, Cantonwine DE, Zera CA, Lim KH, Parry SI, McElrath TF. Urinary tract infection during pregnancy, angiogenic factor profiles, and risk of preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2016 Mar. 214 (3):387.e1-7. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. Schneeberger C, Geerlings SE, Middleton P, Crowther CA. Interventions for preventing recurrent urinary tract infection during pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015 Jul 26. CD009279. [QxMD MEDLINE Link]. [Full Text]. Media Gallery Twenty-nine-year-old pregnant woman with history of reflux uropathy and ureteral reimplantation at age 21 months presents with right-side flank pain and proteinuria. Renal cortical thinning suggests chronic hydronephrosis. Color-flow Doppler highlights normal flow in right kidney of 29-year-old pregnant woman with history of reflux uropathy and ureteral reimplantation at age 21 months who presents with right-side flank pain and proteinuria. 25-year-old pregnant woman with right lower quadrant pain and hematuria has proximal ureteral obstruction consistent with urolithiasis. After 25 minutes, intravenous pyelography reveals dense right nephrogram and no filling of right collecting system. Left side shows unremarkable nonhydronephrotic collecting system. This is consistent with right ureteral lithiasis. of 3 Tables Table. Table. Table 1. Treatment Regimens for Pregnant Women with Asymptomatic Bacteruria or UTI Nitrofurantoin monohydrate/macrocrystals 100 mg orally twice daily for 5-7 days or Amoxicillin 875 mg orally twice daily (alternative: 500 mg orally three times daily) for 5-7 days or Amoxicillin-clavulanate 500/125 mg orally three times daily for 5-7 days (alternative: 875/125 mg orally two times daily for 5-7 days) or Cephalexin 500 mg orally four times daily for 5-7 days or Fosfomycin 3 g orally as a single dose with 3-4 oz. of water Back to List Contributor Information and Disclosures Author Raisa O Platte, MD, PhD Urogynecology Associate, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Geisinger Health System Raisa O Platte, MD, PhD is a member of the following medical societies: American Medical Association, AAGL, American Urogynecologic Society, International Continence SocietyDisclosure: Nothing to disclose. Coauthor(s) Krystal Reynolds, DO, MHSA Resident Physician, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Spectrum Health, Michigan State University College of Human Medicine Krystal Reynolds, DO, MHSA is a member of the following medical societies: American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, American Medical Association, Society for Maternal-Fetal MedicineDisclosure: Nothing to disclose. Chief Editor Edward David Kim, MD, FACS Professor of Urology, Department of Urology, University of Tennessee Graduate School of Medicine; Consulting Staff, University of Tennessee Medical Center Edward David Kim, MD, FACS is a member of the following medical societies: American Society for Reproductive Medicine, American Urological Association, Sexual Medicine Society of North America, Society for Male Reproduction and Urology, Society for the Study of Male Reproduction, Tennessee Medical AssociationDisclosure: Nothing to disclose. Additional Contributors J Stuart Wolf, Jr, MD, FACS David A Bloom Professor of Urology, Associate Chair for Urologic Surgical Services, Director, Division of Endourology and Stone Disease, Department of Urology, University of Michigan Medical School J Stuart Wolf, Jr, MD, FACS is a member of the following medical societies: Catholic Medical Association, Endourological Society, Engineering and Urology Society, Society of Laparoscopic and Robotic Surgeons, Society of University Urologists, Society of Urologic Oncology, American College of Surgeons, American Urological AssociationDisclosure: Nothing to disclose. Emilie Katherine Johnson, MD, MPH Head of Clinical Research, Attending Physician, Division of Urology, Ann and Robert H Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago; Assistant Professor of Urology, Assistant Professor, Center for Healthcare Studies, Institute for Public Health and Medicine Northwestern University, The Feinberg School of Medicine Emilie Katherine Johnson, MD, MPH is a member of the following medical societies: Alpha Omega Alpha, American Urological Association, National Medical Association, Society of Women in UrologyDisclosure: Nothing to disclose. Acknowledgements Gamal Mostafa Ghoniem, MD, FACS Professor of Urology, Chief, Division of Female Urology, Pelvic Reconstructive Surgery, and Voiding Dysfunction, Department of Urology, University of California, Irvine, School of Medicine Gamal Mostafa Ghoniem, MD, FACS is a member of the following medical societies: American College of Surgeons, American Urogynecologic Society, American Urological Association, International Continence Society, International Urogynaecology Association, and Society of Urodynamics and Female Urology Disclosure: Astellas Honoraria Speaking and teaching; Coloplasty Consulting fee Board membership; Uroplasty Consulting fee Consulting Leticia A Jones, MD Clinical Instructor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Indiana University Hospital, Clarian Health Partners Leticia A Jones, MD is a member of the following medical societies: American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. Mark Jeffrey Noble, MD Consulting Staff, Urologic Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation Mark Jeffrey Noble, MD is a member of the following medical societies: American College of Surgeons, American Medical Association, American Urological Association, Kansas Medical Society, Sigma Xi, Society of University Urologists, and Southwest Oncology Group Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. Henry E Ruiz, MD Chief, Reconstructive Urology and Urodynamics, Urology Associates of South Texas, PA and Radiation Oncology Center Henry E Ruiz, MD is a member of the following medical societies: American Urological Association Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. Francisco Talavera, PharmD, PhD Adjunct Assistant Professor, University of Nebraska Medical Center College of Pharmacy; Editor-in-Chief, Medscape Drug Reference Disclosure: Medscape Salary Employment Patrick J Woodman, DO, Assistant Director, Urogynecology (FPMRS) Fellowship, Associate Clinical Professor, Indiana University School of Medicine; Consulting Staff, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Methodist Hospital Patrick J Woodman, DO is a member of the following medical societies: American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists; American College of Surgeons; American Osteopathic Association; American Urogynecologic Society; Association of Professors of Gynecology and Obstetrics; Indiana State Medical Association; International Continence Society Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. Close What would you like to print? What would you like to print? Print this section Print the entire contents of Print the entire contents of article TOP PICKS FOR YOU Sections Urinary Tract Infections in Pregnancy Overview Practice Essentials Pathophysiology Etiology Epidemiology Prognosis Show All Presentation History Physical Examination Complications Show All DDx Workup Approach Considerations Blood Studies Urine Studies Renal Ultrasonography and Intravenous Pyelography Histologic Findings Show All Treatment Medication Medication Summary Antibiotics Show All Questions & Answers Media Gallery Tables References encoded search term (Urinary Tract Infections in Pregnancy) and Urinary Tract Infections in Pregnancy What to Read Next on Medscape Related Conditions and Diseases HIV in Pregnancy Transplantation and Pregnancy Pulmonary Disease and Pregnancy Kidney Disease and Pregnancy Anemia and Thrombocytopenia in Pregnancy Adrenal Disease and Pregnancy News & Perspective To Treat RA During Pregnancy or Not: Biomarkers May Help Air Pollution Tied to Postpartum Depression Caution Urged for Obesity Drugs and Birth Control Pills Tools Drug Interaction Checker Pill Identifier Calculators Formulary Slideshow Visual Findings of 9 Sexually Transmitted Infections Recommended 2001/s/viewarticle/997498 Caution Urged for Obesity Drugs and Birth Control Pills 2003/viewarticle/987146Clinical Review What is the Impact of Ischemic Heart Disease on Maternal Morbidity and Mortality? 0.25 CME / CE / ABIM MOC Credits Clinical Review You are being redirected to Medscape Education Yes, take me there 0.25 CME / CE / ABIM MOC What is the Impact of Ischemic Heart Disease on Maternal Morbidity and Mortality? 2001/s/viewarticle/997460 To Treat RA During Pregnancy or Not: Biomarkers May Help Medscape Log in or register for free to unlock more Medscape contentUnlimited access to our entire network of sites and servicesLog in or Register Log in or register for free to unlock more Medscape content Unlimited access to industry-leading news, research, resources, and more Email Continue or Log in with Google Log in with Facebook Log in with Apple Find Us On About About Medscape Privacy Policy Editorial Policy Cookies Do Not Sell My Personal Information Terms of Use Advertising Policy Help Center Membership Become a Member About You Professional Information Newsletters & Alerts Market Research App Medscape WebMD Network Medscape Live Events WebMD MedicineNet eMedicineHealth RxList WebMD Corporate Medscape UK Editions English Deutsch Español Français Português UK All material on this website is protected by copyright, Copyright © 1994-2023 by WebMD LLC. This website also contains material copyrighted by 3rd parties. Close