Ocular Changes During Pregnancy - American Academy of Ophthalmology Popup headingClose Skip to main content Shop Log In Create an Account For Ophthalmologists For Practice Management For Clinical Teams For Public & Patients About Foundation Museum of the Eye Latest IssueArchive Back Issues (Nov. 2012 to present)Archive Highlights (pre Oct. 2012)Dr. Richard Mills' Opinions, 2002 to 2016 SubscribeAdvertiseWrite For UsContactMIPS 2023MIPS 2022Corporate LunchesCorporate Webinars Advertisement EyeNet Magazine / October 2023 / Ocular Changes During Pregnancy Ocular Changes During Pregnancy By Albert Cheung and Ingrid U. Scott, MD, MPHEdited by Sharon Fekrat, MD Add to My Bookmarks View Mark Complete Remove Comments0 Views20538 This article is from May 2012 and may contain outdated material. Ocular manifestations of pregnancy can be grouped into three categories: physiologic changes, pregnancy-specific eye disease, and modifications of preexisting eye disease. Although the range of possible pregnancy-associated ocular changes is broad, many of these conditions resolve during the postpartum period. Management may involve watching benign findings, referring the patient to another specialist, and undertaking medical or surgical treatment. Although not an exhaustive review, the following highlights several examples in each of the three categories. Physiologic Changes Corneal changes. Physiologic changes that affect the cornea and are most likely due to water retention include a decrease in corneal sensitivity and an increase in both corneal thickness and curvature. These changes occur later in pregnancy and may produce temporary alterations in refraction, making pregnancy a contraindication to refractive eye surgery. Moreover, contact lens intolerance has been reported, so it is advisable to delay fitting and prescribing new corrective or contact lenses until several weeks postpartum. Pregnancy may induce dry-eye syndrome due to a disruption of lacrimal acinar cells. In addition, newly developed Krukenberg spindles, not accompanied by other findings of pigment dispersion, have been observed early in pregnancy; these usually decrease during the third trimester and postpartum. IOP variations. Pregnancy, particularly the second half, is associated with decreased IOP in healthy eyes. In patients with ocular hypertension, this decrease may be even greater.1 Possible mechanisms for these changes include increased aqueous outflow, decreased episcleral venous pressure, decreased scleral rigidity, and generalized acidosis during pregnancy.2 IOP changes typically return to prepregnancy levels by two months postpartum. Adnexal changes. The ocular adnexa may be affected by chloasma, a hormonally mediated increase in pigmentation around the eyes and cheeks, which is common during pregnancy. In addition, benign spider angiomas commonly develop on the face and upper body. Both of these adnexal changes often resolve postpartum. Ptosis, often unilateral, can occur during or after pregnancy, most likely as a result of defects that develop in the levator aponeurosis from fluid, hormonal, and stress-related changes of labor and delivery. Pregnancy-Specific Eye Disease Preeclampsia and eclampsia. Although visible retinal vascular changes occur in 40 to 100 percent of preeclamptic patients, visual symptoms are reported in 25 to 50 percent. These symptoms, which tend to worsen with increasing disease severity, include blurred or decreased vision, photopsia, scotomata, diplopia, visual field defects, and blindness.3,4 The most common ocular finding is constriction or spasm of retinal arterioles, with a decreased retinal artery-to-vein ratio correlating with severity. If the constriction is severe, changes associated with hypertensive retinopathy may occur, including diffuse retinal edema, hemorrhages, exudates, and cotton-wool spots. Possible mechanisms for these changes include hormonal changes, endothelial damage, hypoperfusion ischemia/edema, and coexisting systemic vascular disease.5 Other ocular abnormalities seen in preeclampsia and eclampsia include white-centered retinal hemorrhages, papillophlebitis, Elschnig spots, macular edema, retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) lesions, retinal artery and vein occlusion, optic neuritis, optic atrophy, and ischemic optic neuropathy.2 Exudative (or serous) retinal detachment occurs in less than 1 percent of patients with preeclampsia and in 10 percent with eclampsia, although preeclamptic and eclamptic women with HELLP syndrome (hemolysis/elevated liver enzymes/low platelet count) may be approximately seven times more likely to develop a retinal detachment than those who do not have the syndrome4 (Figs. 1, 2). Exudative retinal detachment tends to be bilateral, diagnosed postpartum, more frequent in primiparous women, and more common in women who undergo cesarean delivery; it tends to resolve completely postpartum.4 Fluorescein angiographic findings support the hypothesis that retinal detachment in preeclampsia/eclampsia is secondary to choroidal ischemia from intense arteriolar vasospasm. The RPE usually resorbs the subretinal fluid postpartum, and visual acuity typically returns to predetachment levels within weeks. Cortical blindness, which affects up to 15 percent of preeclamptic and eclamptic women, is often preceded or accompanied by headache, hyperreflexia, and paresis. This visual loss, if the exam is otherwise normal, often is recovered over a period varying from four hours to eight days, although bilateral inferior scotomata and visual field defects have been reported to persist for several months postpartum.3 An MRI scan may show focal occipital lobe edema, including bilateral edema of the lateral geniculate nuclei, represented by hyperintense lesions on T2-weighted images.6 The reversibility of these lesions, seen in the parieto-occipital area, has been documented on follow-up imaging.6 The constellation of findings (headaches, seizures, cortical blindness, and altered mental status) associated with preeclampsia/eclampsia and other diseases is referred to as reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy syndrome. Because most of the visual disturbances tend to reverse during the postpartum period, the overall prognosis is good for preeclamptic patients. However, the onset of ophthalmic changes or fundus findings in a pregnant patient may presage the onset of seizures and should be evaluated by an obstetrician to rule out preeclampsia. Central serous chorioretinopathy. CSCR results in an accumulation of subretinal fluid that leads to a circumscribed neurosensory retinal detachment in the macula at the level of the RPE. Although CSCR is 10 times more common in men, in women it has a strong association with pregnancy, especially late in pregnancy. Patients most commonly present with unilateral metamorphopsia and moderately reduced visual acuity. Elevated levels of endogenous cortisol are thought to lead to increased permeability in the blood-retinal barrier, choriocapillaris, and RPE. White fibrous subretinal exudates are found in 90 percent of pregnancy-associated cases of CSCR, compared with 20 percent of general cases.7 Although CSCR usually resolves within a few months after delivery and visual acuity returns to normal, changes to the central visual field, metamorphopsia, and RPE alterations may persist. Diagnosis typically is made clinically, but optical coherence tomography has shown value in both identifying and following patients with CSCR. Occlusive vascular disorders. Purtscher-like retinopathy, most likely from arteriolar obstruction by complement-induced leukocyte aggregation, has been documented in the immediate postpartum period. It is associated with preeclampsia, pancreatitis, amniotic fluid emboli, and hypercoagulability. Presentation often consists of severe bilateral visual loss shortly after delivery, with widespread cotton-wool spots with or without intraretinal hemorrhage. The visual prognosis is guarded, but retinal changes and symptoms may resolve spontaneously. Branch and central retinal artery occlusions, as well as retinal vein occlusions (although these are less common), have been reported in pregnancy, presumably secondary to amniotic fluid emboli or a hypercoagulable state. Preexisting Eye Disease Diabetic retinopathy. Although studies have shown pregnancy to be an independent risk factor for worsening diabetic retinopathy (DR), the occurrence of gestational diabetes in the absence of preexisting diabetes does not seem to increase the risk for DR. Other risk factors that may accelerate the worsening of DR in pregnant women include coexisting hypertension or preeclampsia, greater severity and duration of diabetes prior to pregnancy, poor prepregnancy glycemic control, rapid normalization of blood glucose levels during pregnancy, and changes in retinal blood flow. The standard treatment for DR is laser photocoagulation surgery. Although postpartum regression of DR may occur with uncertain rate and timing, women still are at an increased risk of progression for as long as one year postpartum. Worsening macular edema (ME) may present as part of DR and is increased by coexisting hypertension, nephropathy, and proteinuria. This will often regress postpartum but may persist, resulting in long-term visual loss. Clinically significant ME typically is treated with focal laser photocoagulation. The Academy recommends that women with diabetes who plan to become pregnant should have a prepregnancy dilated fundus exam. During pregnancy, an eye exam should be performed in the first trimester, with follow-up scheduled according to amount of retinopathy found. Those with no retinopathy to moderate non-proliferative DR should be reexamined every three to 12 months. Patients with findings of severe NPDR or worse should be reexamined every one to three months. Those diagnosed with gestational diabetes do not require retinopathy screening.8 Uveitis. For chronic noninfectious uveitis, pregnancy seems to confer a beneficial effect, with a lower inci-dence of flare-ups. This is possibly due to hormonal and immunomodulatory effects. When flare-ups do occur, they take place most commonly during the first trimester; there also may be a rebound in activity within the first six months postpartum. Toxoplasmosis. Latent ocular toxoplasmosis may reactivate dur-ing pregnancy, with a negligible risk to the fetus of acquiring congenital toxoplasmosis. Spiramycin has been recommended over pyrimethamine as a safer, yet equally effective, treatment in pregnant women. ___________________________ 1 Qureshi IA. Arch Med Res. 1997;28(3):397-400. 2 Omoti AE et al. Afr J Reprod Health. 2008;12(3):185-196. 3 Schultz KL et al. Curr Opin Ophthalmol. 2005;16(5):308-314. 4 Vigil-De Gracia P, Ortega-Paz L. Int J Gyn-aecol Obstet. 2011;114(3):223-225. 5 Dinn RB et al. Obstet Gynecol Surv. 2003;58(2):137-144. 6 Cunningham FG et al. Am J Obstet Gyne-col. 1995;172(4 Pt 1):1291-1298. 7 Sunness JS et al. Arch Ophthalmol. 1993;111(3):360-364. 8 Preferrred Practice Pattern Guidelines: Diabetic Retinopathy. American Academy of Ophthalmology. 2008. Available at www.aao.org/ppp. ___________________________ Mr. Cheung is a medical student and Dr. Scott is professor of ophthalmology and public health sciences; both are at Penn State College of Medicine in Hershey, Pa. The authors report no related financial interests. Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus. Advertisement Advertisement Advertisement Advertisement Advertisement Most Commented Loading, please wait... There are no comments available. Most Viewed Loading, please wait... Most Viewed content is not available. National Government Services Noridian Atlantic Coast Retina Club/Macula 2024 Contact Us About the Academy Jobs at the Academy Financial Relationships with Industry Medical Disclaimer Privacy Policy Terms of Service Statement on Artificial Intelligence Help For Advertisers For Media Ophthalmology Job Center OUR SITES EyeWiki International Society of Refractive Surgery FOLLOW THE ACADEMY Medical Professionals Public & Patients Museum of the Eye © American Academy of Ophthalmology 2023 My Dashboard My Education Find an Ophthalmologist Home For Ophthalmologists Meetings AAO 2023 Meeting Information Past and Future Meetings Mobile Meeting Guide Contact Information Annual Meeting News Health and Safety Policies and Disclaimers Program Program Highlights Subspecialty Day Virtual Meeting Program Committees CME Meeting Archives Expo Registration Hotels & Travel Hotel Reservation Information San Francisco International Attendees Hotel Meeting Space Presenter Central Presenter Central Abstract Selection Process Submission Policies Subject Classification/Topics Instruction Courses and Skills Transfer Labs Papers and Posters Videos Grand Rounds Symposium Program Participant and Faculty Guidelines Faculty Development Program Exhibitors Exhibitor Central Exhibitor Portal Information New Exhibiting Companies Exhibitor Resources International Exhibitors Promotional Opportunities Exhibitor Hotel Reservations Mid-Year Forum Registration and Travel Congressional Advocacy Day Advocacy Ambassador Program Program Schedule Sponsored Attendees News Codequest Codequest Instructors Claim Codequest CME or CEU Credit Eyecelerator Clinical Education Education Browse All Education Courses Cases Learning Plans Interactive Focal Points Wills Eye Manual Disease Reviews Clinical Webinars Diagnose This Self-Assessments Educational Centers Glaucoma Education Center Pediatric Ophthalmology Education Center Global Ophthalmology Guide Laser Surgery Education Center Redmond Ethics Center Myopia Resources Thyroid Eye Disease Resources Journals Guidelines Browse All Practice Guidelines COVID-19 Resources Drug-Resistant Pseudomonas Outbreak Preferred Practice Patterns Clinical Statements Compendium Guidelines Complementary Therapy Assessments Medical Information Technology Ophthalmic Technology Assessments Patient Safety Statements Choosing Wisely Low Vision Eye Care for Older Adults Eye Disease Statistics About the Hoskins Center Video and Image Library Browse All Videos 1-Minute Videos Presentations and Lectures Master Class Videos Clinical and Surgical Videos Basic Skills Videos Interviews Images Submit an Image Submit a Video Podcasts Browse All Audio and Podcasts Experts InSight Ophthalmology Journal News Browse All Clinical News Editors' Choice Headlines Current Insight CME Central Browse All CME Activities About Continuing Certification Claim CME Credit and View Transcript CME Planning Resources Complete Your Financial Disclosure LEO Continuing Education Recognition Award Safe ER/LA Opioid Prescribing Check Your Industry Payment Records Resident Education Resident Education Home Browse All Resident Content Blog Posts Courses Flashcards and Study Presentations Interactive Cases and Simulations Videos Webinars Cataract Master Diversity and Inclusion Education News and Advice from YO Info OKAP and Board Exam Resources OKAP Exam Board Prep Resources OKAP and Board Review Presentations Study Flashcards Pediatric Ophthalmology Education Center PGY-1 and PGY-2 Resources Resident Knowledge Exchange Simulation in Resident Education Ophthalmology Job Center Membership Join Renew Current Member Volunteer Physician Wellness Member Directory Member Obituaries AAOE Membership Advocacy Advocacy News Get Involved Ways to Give How to Get Involved Congressional Advocacy Support the Academy's Agenda Research Legislation Find Your Legislators I Am an Advocate Advocacy at Home Advocate Tools Best Practices for Advocating at Home Social Media Toolkit Letter to Editor Town Hall Guide Guide to Engaging With New Lawmakers Resources Attending a Political Fundraiser OPHTHPAC About Us Join OPHTHPAC OPHTHPAC Blog Surgical Scope Fund Support Surgery By Surgeons Surgery By Surgeons Blog Publications EyeNet Magazine Latest Issue Archive Subscribe Advertise Write For Us Corporate Lunches Contact MIPS 2022 Focal Points Ophthalmology Ophthalmology Glaucoma Ophthalmology Retina Ophthalmology Science YO Info Scope Subspecialties Cataract/Anterior Segment Comprehensive Ophthalmology Cornea/External Disease Glaucoma Neuro-Ophthalmology/Orbit Ocular Pathology/Oncology Oculoplastics/Orbit Pediatric Ophthalmology/Strabismus Refractive Management/Intervention Retina/Vitreous Uveitis IRIS Registry About Using the Registry User Guide Medicare Reporting Maintenance of Certification Non-EHR Reporting Sign Up Application Process Why Participate Once You've Applied: Getting Started What Practices Are Saying About the Registry Requirements EHR Systems Data & Technical Needs Research Registry Dashboard News Medicare & MIPS Medicare Information Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion For Practice Management Managing Your Practice Managing Your Practice Topics Coronavirus Resources Reopening & Recovery Practice Forms Library Practice Management News and Advice AAOE-Talk Video Library Ophthalmology Job Center Benchmarking and Salary Tools Academy Consultations Consultant Directory Coding Coding Topics Codequest Events Ask the Coding Experts Coding Updates and Resources Coding for Injectable Drugs EM Documentation ICD-10-CM Ophthalmic Coding Specialist (OCS) Exam Retina Savvy Coder Webinars and Events Annual Meeting Master Classes Coding Sessions Submit an Instruction Course Codequest Courses Mid-Year Forum Webinar Recordings Upcoming Webinars IRIS Registry Merit-Based Incentive Payment Medicare and MIPS MIPS Quality Promoting Interoperability Improvement Activities Cost Avoid a Penalty Resources Medicare Participation Options Medicare Advantage Plans New Medicare Card Provider Enrollment, Chain and Ownership System (PECOS) Regulatory Compliance HIPPA Resources Office of Inspector General Audits OSHA AAOE Membership Join AAOE Membership Benefits Renew/Pay Dues About AAOE AAOE Board of Directors AAOE Content Committee Volunteer Opportunities For Clinical Teams Join AAOP Education Build Your Career Annual Meeting About AAOP For Public & Patients Eye Health A-Z Symptoms Glasses & Contacts Tips & Prevention News Ask an Ophthalmologist Patient Stories No Cost Eye Exams Español A - Z de Salud Ocular Síntomas Anteojos y Lentes de Contacto Consejos y Prevención Noticias Relatos de Pacientes Exámenes de la vista sin costo English AAO 2023 Meeting Information Past and Future Meetings Mobile Meeting Guide Contact Information Annual Meeting News Health and Safety Policies and Disclaimers Program Program Highlights Subspecialty Day Virtual Meeting Program Committees CME Meeting Archives Expo Registration Hotels & Travel Hotel Reservation Information San Francisco International Attendees Hotel Meeting Space Presenter Central Presenter Central Abstract Selection Process Submission Policies Subject Classification/Topics Instruction Courses and Skills Transfer Labs Papers and Posters Videos Grand Rounds Symposium Program Participant and Faculty Guidelines Faculty Development Program Exhibitors Exhibitor Central Exhibitor Portal Information New Exhibiting Companies Exhibitor Resources International Exhibitors Promotional Opportunities Exhibitor Hotel Reservations About Who We Are What We Do About Ophthalmology The Eye Care Team Ethics and the Academy History Museum of Vision Values Governance Council Board of Trustees Committees Academy Past Presidents Secretariats Elections Academy Blog Academy Staff Leadership Leadership Development Awards Laureate Recognition Award Outstanding Advocate Award Outstanding Humanitarian Service Award International Blindness Prevention Award Distinguished Service Award Guests of Honor Secretariat Award Straatsma Award Achievement Award Program Artemis Award EnergEYES Award International Education Award International Scholar Award Commitment to Advocacy Award Visionary Society Award Financial Relationships Policy Statements Related Organizations Subspecialty/Specialized Interest Society Directory State Society Directory Subspecialty/Specialized Interest Society Meetings State Society Meetings Resources for Societies Year in Review 2022 Year in Review Foundation About 2021-2022 Annual Report Annual Report Archives News From the Chair Foundation Staff Our Impact Partners for Sight Donor Spotlights Global Ophthalmic Community Sponsorships Patients and the Public Giving Options Our Supporters Estate and Planned Giving Ophthalmic Business Council Parke Center Campaign Minority Ophthalmology Mentoring Campaign Museum of the Eye Campaign Orbital Gala Why Attend Corporate Support Opportunities Corporate Sponsors Donate Museum of the Eye Campaign Museum Supporters Museum of the Eye Visit What's On Museum Galleries Special Exhibitions Current Events Past Events Explore Research and Resources Collection Search Previous Exhibits Oral Histories Biographies Volunteer Mailing List Donate About the Museum Museum Blog Young Ophthalmologists YO Info Learn to Bill Engage with the Academy Practice Management for YOs Ophthalmology Job Center Senior Ophthalmologists Scope Practice Transitions International Ophthalmologists Global Programs and Resources for National Societies Awards Global Outreach Residents Medical Students × By clicking “Accept All Cookies,” you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. Learn MoreCookies Settings Accept All CookiesPrivacy Preference CenterWhen you visit any website, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalized web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.Allow All Manage Consent PreferencesTargeting Cookies Targeting Cookies These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.Performance Cookies Performance Cookies These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.Functional Cookies Functional Cookies These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.Strictly Necessary CookiesAlways ActiveThese cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.Back ButtonPerformance Cookies Search IconFilter IconClear checkbox label labelApply CancelConsent Leg.Interest checkbox label label checkbox label label checkbox label label Confirm My Choices