New study reveals that children of mothers with diabetes during pregnancy have an increased risk of eye problems | ScienceDaily Your source for the latest research news Follow: Facebook X/Twitter Subscribe: RSS Feeds Newsletter New! Stay informed with our free email newsletter. advertisement Science News from research organizations New study reveals that children of mothers with diabetes during pregnancy have an increased risk of eye problems Date: August 17, 2021 Source: Diabetologia Summary: A new study finds that mothers who have diabetes before or during their pregnancy are more likely to have children who go on to develop eye problems. Share: Facebook Twitter Pinterest LinkedIN Email advertisement FULL STORY A new study published in Diabetologia (the journal of the European Association for the Study of Diabetes [EASD]) finds that mothers who have diabetes before or during their pregnancy are more likely to have children who go on to develop eye problems. The research is by Dr Jiangbo Du, State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China, and Dr Jiong Li, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark, and colleagues. It analysed the associations between maternal diabetes before or during pregnancy and the risk of high refractive error (RE): conditions in which there is a failure of the eye to properly focus images on the retina. RE is one of the most common forms of visual impairment and includes both long and short-sightedness as well as astigmatism. Collectively these conditions are the second most common form of disability globally, and while low-degree REs can be corrected optically using spectacles or contact lenses, more serious high-degree REs can develop into severe and irreversible visual impairment that can reduce an individual's quality of life. In recent decades there has been a rapid increase in the prevalence of RE, indicating that non-genetic factors may play an important role in its development. An increased tendency to perform close-up work such as using computers for long periods, as well as a lack of outdoor activity has been established as the main acquired risk factors for low and moderate RE development in school-age children and young adults. The causes of high RE defects, however, are still not fully understood. Earlier research has shown that individuals with severe RE may have congenital eye defects before birth, suggesting that the conditions to which the fetus is exposed in the uterus may play a role in the development of more serious RE in later life. Maternal hyperglycaemia (high blood sugar) during pregnancy may lead to elevated fetal blood glucose levels, which can damage the retina and optic nerve and may lead to changes in the shape of the eyes that ultimately cause RE. The authors believed that exposure to the effects of maternal diabetes while in the uterus could negatively affect the development of the fetus and lead to high RE in later life. They also anticipated that the most pronounced associations would be observed among mothers with diabetic complications since they usually represent more severe cases of the disease. The team conducted a population-based cohort study using several Danish national medical registers and incorporated the details of all live births in Denmark from 1977 to 2016. Follow-up began at birth and continued until the first high RE diagnosis (where applicable), the death of the subject, their emigration, their 25th birthday, or the end of the study period on 31 December 2016, whichever came first. Mothers were considered to have diabetes if they were diagnosed with the disease either before or during pregnancy, and those with pre-gestational diabetes who had developed problems relating to their condition were grouped according to whether they had one or multiple complications. advertisement The authors analysed both the occurrence of high RE in offspring and the specific type of eye problem. Out of 2,470,580 live births included in the study, 56,419 (2.3%) were exposed to maternal diabetes with 0.9% and 0.3% being type 1 and type 2 pre-gestational diabetes respectively (meaning diabetes already present before pregnancy), and 1.1% involving gestational diabetes. The proportion of births to mothers with diabetes increased over the study period from 0.4% in 1977 to 6.5% in 2016 and diabetes was associated with the mother being older, more educated, having had more pregnancies, and being more likely to live alone. During the follow-up period, high RE was diagnosed in 533 offspring of mothers with diabetes, and 19,695 offspring of those without the disease. Exposure to maternal diabetes was associated with a 39% greater risk of high RE compared to unexposed offspring. The researchers observed a difference in RE risk between type 1 and type 2 forms of diabetes with rates of high RE compared to unexposed individuals being 32% and 68% higher respectively. In addition, children of mothers with complications arising from diabetes were twice as likely to have eye problems, compared to an 18% increase in high RE risk in children of mothers who had no complications from the disease. The authors say: "It was interesting to observe that hypermetropia (long-sightedness) occurred more frequently in childhood and myopia (short-sightedness) was more frequent in adolescence and young adulthood." They suggest that the difference might be due to the natural process of emmetropisation in which the eye changes shape during early childhood to achieve normal vision by becoming less long-sighted, and which could correct most hyperopia in early infancy over time. In addition, they point out that the increasing number of years and intensity of school education could increase the risk of myopia from early childhood to young adulthood. advertisement The strengths of this study are that it used high-quality data covering the whole Danish population over a long follow-up period, thus minimising the possibility of selection bias and recall bias. Availability of sociodemographic and medical information enabled the team to adjust for a wide range of factors which could influence the studied medical outcomes, and the large sample size allowed them to investigate details such as the specific types of RE involved. The authors say: "In this nationwide population-based cohort study, we observed that children born to mothers with either pre-gestational or gestational diabetes were at an increased risk of developing high RE in general, as well as specific types of high RE, persisting from the neonatal period to early adulthood. Children born to mothers with diabetic complications had the highest risk of high RE." The researchers suggest: "As many REs in young children are treatable, early identification and intervention can have a lifelong positive impact. Although the 39% increased risk is a relatively low effect size, from a public health perspective, considering the high global prevalence of REs, any tiny improvement in this low-risk preventable factor will contribute to a huge reduction in absolute numbers of these eye conditions." They advise that early screening for eye disorders in the children of mothers with diabetes may play an important role in maintaining good eyesight health. RELATED TOPICS Health & Medicine Diabetes Pregnancy and Childbirth Chronic Illness Cholesterol Eye Care Diseases and Conditions Hormone Disorders Children's Health RELATED TERMS Diabetes mellitus type 1 Nutrition and pregnancy Diabetes Diabetes mellitus type 2 Postpartum depression Uterus Breastfeeding Pregnancy Story Source: Materials provided by Diabetologia. Note: Content may be edited for style and length. Journal Reference: Jiangbo Du, Jiong Li, Xiaoqin Liu, Hu Liu, Carsten Obel, Hongbing Shen, Zhibin Hu, Yongfu Yu. Association of maternal diabetes during pregnancy with high refractive error in offspring: a nationwide population-based cohort study. Diabetologia, 2021; DOI: 10.1007/s00125-021-05526-z Cite This Page: MLA APA Chicago Diabetologia. "New study reveals that children of mothers with diabetes during pregnancy have an increased risk of eye problems." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 17 August 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/08/210817193001.htm>. Diabetologia. (2021, August 17). New study reveals that children of mothers with diabetes during pregnancy have an increased risk of eye problems. ScienceDaily. Retrieved October 20, 2023 from www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/08/210817193001.htm Diabetologia. "New study reveals that children of mothers with diabetes during pregnancy have an increased risk of eye problems." ScienceDaily. www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/08/210817193001.htm (accessed October 20, 2023). Explore More from ScienceDaily RELATED STORIES Gestational Diabetes May Accelerate Child's Biological Age Sep. 10, 2020 — Children born to mothers who had diabetes during pregnancy may age faster biologically and be at an increased risk for obesity and high blood pressure, according to ... High Sugar Levels During Pregnancy Could Lead to Childhood Obesity May 28, 2019 — The children of women who have high glucose blood levels during pregnancy, even if their mothers are not diagnosed with gestational diabetes, are at an increased risk of developing obesity in ... Maternal Gestational Diabetes Linked to Diabetes in Children Apr. 15, 2019 — Children and youth of mothers who had gestational diabetes during pregnancy are at increased risk of diabetes themselves, according to new ... Mothers Whose Responses to Infants' Facial Cues Increase Report Stronger Bonds With Babies Dec. 4, 2018 — A new study examines whether pregnancy changes mothers' neural sensitivity to infants' facial cues, and whether such changes affect mother-infant bonding. The study finds that increases in cortical ... Print Email Share Breaking this hour Holy Bat Skull! Red Meat and Type 2 Diabetes Risk Black Holes Could Come in 'Perfect Pairs' Most Distant Fast Radio Burst Ever Genetics of the Common Octopus You Don't Lose If You Snooze Evolutionary Secrets of Famous Killer Whale Flex a Finger to Power a Wearable Device Miniature Particle Accelerator Works Gene Therapy Can Effectively Target Glioblastoma Trending Topics this week HEALTH & MEDICINE Heart Disease Mental Health Research Patient Education and Counseling MIND & BRAIN Dementia Infant and Preschool Learning Consumer Behavior LIVING & WELL Consumer Behavior Fitness Staying Healthy advertisement Strange & Offbeat HEALTH & MEDICINE Stolen Genes Allow Parasitic Control of Behavior Wearable Device Makes Memories and Powers Up With the Flex of a Finger The Encounter Between Neanderthals and Sapiens as Told by Their Genomes MIND & BRAIN Researchers Reconstruct Speech from Brain Activity, Illuminates Complex Neural Processes Neanderthal Gene Variants Associated With Greater Pain Sensitivity Extreme Sports: How Body and Mind Interact LIVING & WELL Skin Behind the Ears and Between the Toes Can Host a Collection of Unhealthy Microbes Your Body's Own Cannabinoid Molecules Calm You During Stress Lower Jersey Numbers Make Football Players Look Thinner Toggle navigation Menu SD SD Home Page Top Science News Latest News Home Home Page Top Science News Latest News Health View all the latest top news in the health sciences, or browse the topics below: Health & Medicine Allergy Cancer Cold and Flu Diabetes Heart Disease ... more topics Mind & Brain ADD and ADHD Alzheimer's Headaches Intelligence Psychology ... more topics Living Well Parenting Child Development Stress Nutrition Fitness ... more topics Tech View all the latest top news in the physical sciences & technology, or browse the topics below: Matter & Energy Chemistry Fossil Fuels Nanotechnology Physics Solar Energy ... more topics Space & Time Black Holes Dark Matter Extrasolar Planets Solar System Space Telescopes ... more topics Computers & Math Artificial Intelligence Mathematics Quantum Computers Robotics Virtual Reality ... more topics Enviro View all the latest top news in the environmental sciences, or browse the topics below: Plants & Animals Agriculture and Food Biology Biotechnology Extinction Microbes and More ... more topics Earth & Climate Climate Earthquakes Geology Global Warming Pollution ... more topics Fossils & Ruins Anthropology Archaeology Dinosaurs Evolution Paleontology ... more topics Society View all the latest top news in the social sciences & education, or browse the topics below: Science & Society Arts & Culture Economics Privacy Issues Public Health Sports ... more topics Business & Industry Computers & Internet Energy & Resources Engineering Medical Technology Transportation ... more topics Education & Learning Creativity Educational Psychology Infant & Preschool Learning Disorders STEM Education ... more topics Quirky Top News Human Quirks Odd Creatures Bizarre Things Weird World Keyword:Search Free Subscriptions Stay informed with ScienceDaily's free email newsletter, updated daily and weekly. Or view our many newsfeeds in your RSS reader: Email Newsletter RSS Feeds Follow Us Keep up to date with the latest news from ScienceDaily via social networks: Facebook X / Twitter Have Feedback? Tell us what you think of ScienceDaily -- we welcome both positive and negative comments. Have any problems using the site? Questions? Leave Feedback Contact Us About This Site | Staff | Reviews | Contribute | Advertise | Privacy Policy | Editorial Policy | Terms of Use Copyright 1995-2023 ScienceDaily or by other parties, where indicated. All rights controlled by their respective owners. Content on this website is for information only. It is not intended to provide medical or other professional advice. Views expressed here do not necessarily reflect those of ScienceDaily, its staff, its contributors, or its partners. Financial support for ScienceDaily comes from advertisements and referral programs, where indicated. — Manage My Privacy Settings — Share this page ... New study reveals that children of mothers with diabetes during pregnancy have an increased risk of eye problems https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/08/210817193001.htm A new study finds that mothers who have diabetes before or during their pregnancy are more likely to have children who go on to develop eye problems. Facebook Twitter Pinterest LinkedIN Email Close