Nausea and Vomiting in Early Pregnancy and the Risk of Neural Tube Defects: a Case-Control Study | Scientific Reports Your Privacy We use cookies to make sure that our website works properly, as well as some optional cookies to personalise content and advertising, provide social media features and analyse how people use our site. By accepting some or all optional cookies you give consent to the processing of your personal data, including transfer to third parties, some in countries outside of the European Economic Area that do not offer the same data protection standards as the country where you live. You can decide which optional cookies to accept by clicking on "Manage preferences", where you can also find more information about how your personal data is processed. Further information can be found in our privacy policy. Accept all cookies Manage preferences Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Log in Explore content Explore content Research articles News & Comment Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal About the journal About Scientific Reports Open Access Journal policies Guide to referees Calls for Papers Contact Editor's Choice Journal highlights Publish with us Publish with us For authors Language editing services Submit manuscript Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature scientific reports articles article Nausea and Vomiting in Early Pregnancy and the Risk of Neural Tube Defects: a Case-Control Study Download PDF Your content has downloaded Similar content being viewed by others Slider with three content items shown per slide. Use the Previous and Next buttons to navigate the slides or the slide controller buttons at the end to navigate through each slide. Antenatal magnesium sulfate treatment and risk of necrotizing enterocolitis in preterm infants born at less than 32 weeks of gestation Article30 July 2020 Ji Young Hong, Jee Youn Hong, … Won Soon Park Effects of prophylactic indomethacin on intraventricular hemorrhage and adverse outcomes in neonatal intensive care unit Article25 June 2022 Colleen J. Miller, Pavel Prusakov, … Leif D. Nelin Age at first birth and risk of urinary incontinence after delivery: a dose–response meta-analysis Article05 October 2022 Yongcheng Ren, Qing Hu, … Lei Yang Association between postmenstrual age and furosemide dosing practices in very preterm infants Article24 January 2022 Nicolas A. Bamat, Elizabeth J. Thompson, … Matthew M. Laughon Antenatal Magnesium Sulfate and adverse gastrointestinal outcomes in Preterm infants—a systematic review and meta-analysis Article30 June 2023 Arun Prasath, Nell Aronoff, … Shivashankar Diggikar Women with prolonged nausea in pregnancy have increased risk for depressive symptoms postpartum Article25 October 2018 Stavros I. Iliadis, Cathrine Axfors, … Ajlana Mulic-Lutvica Maternal periconceptional folic acid supplementation and risk for fetal congenital genitourinary system defects Article15 September 2023 Zixi Pang, Lei Jin, … Lei Jin Factors associated with successful vaginal birth after one lower uterine transverse cesarean section delivery Article31 May 2023 Tigist Derebe Tesfahun, Amlaku Mulat Awoke, … Aberash Beyene Placental origins of neonatal diseases: toward a precision medicine approach Article07 December 2020 Imran N. Mir, Rachel Leon & Lina F. Chalak Download PDF Open access Published: 08 January 2015 Nausea and Vomiting in Early Pregnancy and the Risk of Neural Tube Defects: a Case-Control Study Qing-Bin Lu1 na1, Zhi-Ping Wang2 na1, Li-Jie Gao2 na1, Rui Gong2 na1, Xi-Hong Sun2 na1, Meng Wang2 na1 & …Zhong-Tang Zhao2 na1 Show authors Scientific Reports volume 5, Article number: 7674 (2015) Cite this article 3567 Accesses 6 Citations 1 Altmetric Metrics details AbstractThere has been considerable professional debate on the association between nausea and vomiting in early pregnancy (NVP) and neural tube defects (NTDs) risk. This study explored the association between NVP and NTDs risk and the effect of folic acid supplements on the association. A 1:1 matched case-control study was conducted and conditional logistic regression model was used to analyze the associations. The result showed the odds ratio (OR) of severe NVP for NTDs was 2.403 (95%CI 1.437,4.017; P<0.001) and that of moderate NVP was 1.469 (95%CI 1.063,2.031; P = 0.020) compared with light NVP when adjusted by the potential confounders. Stratified by intake of folic acid supplements, the ORs for severe and moderate NVP turned to 2.147 (95%CI 1.140, 4.043; P = 0.018) and 2.055 (95%CI 1.320, 3.199; P = 0.001) in the stratum of non-intake of folic acid supplements while ORs reduced to 1.851 (95%CI 0.729, 4.699; P = 0.195) and 1.003 (95%CI 0.594, 1.694; P = 0.992) in the stratum of intake of folic acid supplements, respectively. We conclude that severe/moderate NVP has an association with the risk of NTDs, which was not found in the group with intake of folic acid supplements. Folic acid supplements should be recommended to use for the prevention of NTDs. IntroductionNeural tube defects (NTDs) are one group of severe defects in the central nervous system, always leading to infant deaths or disabilities. Data from the National Center for Birth Defects Monitor of China showed that the incidence rate of NTDs was 4.50 per ten thousand in the year of 2011. Lots of environmental and genetic factors have been proved to be risk factor of NTDs, such as smoking, passive smoking, obesity, lack of folic acid, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase C677T mutation and so on1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12. Yet, there has been less professional debate on the association between nausea and vomiting in early pregnancy (NVP) and the risk of NTDs.NVP is a common experience in pregnancy and the meta-analytic average rate was 69.4%, but reported rates vary widely13. Meanwhile, NVP is found more often in Western countries and urban populations and rarely among Africans, Native Americans, Eskimos and most Asian populations14. Although most women with NVP have symptoms limited to the first trimester from six weeks to 12 weeks, a small proportion of women have a prolonged course with symptoms extending until delivery. Women with severe NVP may suffer from hyperemesis gravidarum, an entity distinct from NVP, which may lead to maternal and fetal morbidity if left untreated.Most studies have demonstrated that NVP is associated with a favorable outcome of the fetus. Weigel et al. found a strong significant association between NVP and decreased risk of miscarriage, but no consistent associations with perinatal mortality15. However, an increased risk of intrauterine growth retardation and low birth weight was associated with the women with severe NVP16,17. Previous studies also showed no difference in congenital abnormalities between those with and without NVP11 and a lower risk of congenital heart defects in infants born to women with early onset of NVP requiring antiemetic use compared to women without nausea18.However, there has been considerable professional debate on the association between NVP and the risk of NTDs. Czeizel et al. suggested an inverse association between severe NVP and the risk of some congenital abnormalities, including NTDs19. While this association was not observed in other studies20,21. NVP may reduce energy intake and levels of anabolic hormones, insulin and insulin growth factor leading to a shunting of scarce nutrients to the placenta and fetus22, also including maternal level of folic acid. The evidence of public health suggests that daily folic acid supplements have a significant protective effect in preventing NTDs. It remains unknow whether the folic acid supplements intake would affect the association between NVP and NTDs. Meanwhile, the severity of nausea and vomiting was associated with the frequency of feelings of depression and adverse effects on women's relationships, which may have an effect on the risk of NTDs23.Therefore, we conducted a matched case-control study in China to further explore the association between NVP and NTDs risk and the effect of folic acid supplements on the association between NVP and NTDs risk.MethodsThe 1:1 matched case-control study was conducted in Shanxi Province and Shandong Province of China. We identified study subjects and collected the information from the registration cards and hospital records through the National Center for Birth Defects Monitor of China, the Maternal and Child Care Service Centers, the Family Planning Centers and the local hospitals. We excluded those without detailed home address and contact information.Cases were the women with any infant or fetus with a diagnosis (ICD-10) of anencephaly (Q00.0), spina bifida (Q05), or encephalocele (Q01) at birth or prenatally within 2 years before the survey date (from March to December 2008). Controls were the women with live born infants, randomly selected without an apparent congenital malformation. The matching criteria were that the matched case and control were from the same region, the same hospital and childbirth in the same year in order to control the potential confounding factors by the above factors and reduce the sample size.In the study, structured questionnaires were used for data collection. The questionnaire contained questions on maternal socio-demographic characteristics (age, education, occupation and annual income), conditions of fetuses or infants, height and prepregnancy weight, exposure to passive smoking and pesticide, chronic diseases (anemia, diabetes, epilepsy, hyperthyroidism, tumor and hypertension), fever or cold, NVP status, intake of folic acid supplements and nutritional status in the periconceptional period. The questionnaires were administered through household-to-household survey by well-trained interviewers who had no knowledge of the main hypotheses of the study. The study protocol was reviewed and approved by the Ethics Review Committee of Public Health at Shandong University. The methods were carried out in accordance with the approved guidelines. Informed consent forms were shown to the subjects and their spouses and signed by the subjects with the assistance of community/village doctors.Severity of NTD was categorized by three stages: light NVP means one or none of most situation in early pregnancy with salivation or mild nausea and vomiting in early morning, which would not affect daily life; moderate NVP means that the symptoms of nausea and vomiting aggravate and occur to be not limited to the morning, which can be released after an adequate rest; severe NVP means the continuous symptoms of nausea and vomiting occur and the women need to rest in bed or be hospitalized.Descriptive statistics were calculated for all variables; continuous variables were summarized as means and standard deviations or median and range and categorical variables were summarized as frequencies and proportions. To determine the difference between groups, independent t test, chi-square test, or Fisher exact was used where appropriate. Body mass index (BMI) was calculated by prepregnancy weight (kg) divided by the square of height (m). Differences of categorical data between the case women and the control women were examined by conditional logistic regression models which were used to calculate odds ratios (ORs) and their 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Conditional logistic regression model was used in order to analyze the association between NVP and NTDs stratified by the variable of intake of folic acid supplements. Adjusted ORs and their 95%CIs were calculated by adjusting for the potential confounders. A two-sided P value of less than 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant. All analyses were performed using SAS software, version 9.1.3 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA).ResultsTotally 459 case women and 459 control women were recruited in the study. There were 194 anencephaly, 200 spina bifida and 65 encephalocele in the case group. The characteristics of the women in the case and control groups were presented in Table 1. The differences between the case and the control groups were statistically significant for occupation, education level, annual income, BMI, passive smoking, exposure to pesticide, intake of folic acid supplements and maternal chronic diseases (all P<0.05) except for age.Table 1 Characteristics of the subject women in the case and control groupsFull size tableNVP distribution in case and control groups and the OR values between NVP and NTDs risk stratified by the variable of intake of folic acid supplements were shown in Table 2. In the case women, 11.5% (53/459) had severe NVP and 29.0% (133/459) had moderate NVP in the first trimester. In the control women, 6.1% (28/459) had severe NVP and 24.6% (113/459) had moderate NVP in the first trimester. The OR of NTDs for the women with severe NVP was 2.403 (95%CI 1.437,4.017; P<0.001) and that with moderate NVP was 1.469 (95%CI 1.063,2.031; P = 0.020), compared to the women with light NVP when adjusted by the potential confounders. The interaction between NVP and intake of folic acid supplements demonstrated a significantly antagonistic effect (P = 0.034). Interestingly, when stratified by intake of folic acid supplements, the ORs for severe and moderate NVP turned to 2.147 (95%CI 1.140, 4.043; P = 0.018) and 2.055 (95%CI 1.320, 3.199; P = 0.001) compared to light NVP in the stratum of non-intake of folic acid supplements, respectively. While in the stratum of intake of folic acid supplements, the ORs for severe and moderate NVP reduced to 1.851 (95%CI 0.729, 4.699) and 1.003 (95%CI 0.594, 1.694), respectively, which demonstrated no statistically significant differences compared with light NVP (P = 0.195 and P = 0.992).Table 2 NVP distribution in case and control groups and the OR values between NVP and NTDs stratified by intake of folic acid supplementsFull size tableThe distribution and risk of NVP for the different subtypes of NTDs were shown in Table 3 and Table 4. The risk of anencephaly was significantly associated with severe NVP and the OR value was 3.738 (95%CI 1.158, 12.073; P = 0.028) when adjusted by the potential confounders. However, no statistically significant associations were found between NVP and spina bifida/encephalocele (all P>0.05). When stratified by intake of folic acid supplements, the risk of severe and moderate NVP for anencephaly rose in the group of non-intake of folic acid supplements and reduced to no statistically significant differences in the group of intake of folic acid supplements. For spina bifida, it showed no differences stratified by intake of folic acid supplements.Table 3 The distribution NVP in the case and control groups for different subtypes of NTDsFull size tableTable 4 Adjusted OR values between NVP and different subtypes of NTDs stratified by intake of folic acid supplementsFull size tableDiscussionThis study had explored the association between NVP and NTDs risk. The results showed that severe or moderate NVP had a significant association with the risk of NTDs. While this association was not found in the group with the intake of folic acid supplements.The etiology of NVP has been well understood, but it is widely believed that physiological, psychological, genetic and cultural components are contributing factors14,18. The occurrence of NVP may be of benefit in pregnancy and less likely to result in miscarriage, preterm delivery, or intrauterine growth retardation. The Maternal and Embryo Protection Hypothesis posits that pregnancy sickness results in adaptive dietary changes that reduce the exposure of the fetus and mother to dietary pathogens, toxins and parasites by reducing the intake of foods such as meat, fish and dairy products24. But the study by Weigel et al. was little direct evidence for this hypothesis25. Studies suggested that NVP was promoted by secretion of human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG), largely on the basis of the coincidence between the onset of NVP and hCG secretion and the peaks of both at around 12 to 14 weeks in the first trimester26,27,28. Abnormal concentrations of hCG are associated with poor pregnancy outcomes. It seems that NVP and hCG are related and nutrient restriction during critical periods of embryonic development may ensure production of hCG at optimal levels to protect placental development and optimize nutrient partitioning between maternal and fetal tissues.In our study, we found an opposite effect: a higher level of pregnancy sickness was correlated with a worse pregnancy outcome- a higher likelihood of neural tube defects. The advocates of the maternal and embryo protection hypothesis have not considered the potential costs of pregnancy sickness, in particular, reduced dietary intake. Lee et al. reported that morning sickness in pregnant women result in poor dietary diversity and reduced intakes of energy, protein and micronutrients and, consequently, adversely affected infant outcome as well as maternal weight gain during early pregnancy29. In that case, reduced dietary intake certainly will influence or decrease the level of folic acid, which is mainly depending on food intake. It has been proved that folate deficiency could increase the risk of NTDs while intake of folic acid supplements could decrease the risk of NTDs11, which is also observed from our study. The result demonstrated that severe NVP was related to the risk of NTDs in this study. Stratified by the intake of folic acid supplements, the risk of NTD by severe NVP was decreased in the group with intake of folic acid supplements. The assumption is partly proved that severe NVP may reduce the intake of nutrition and then lower the level of folic acid in the maternal body, leading to the increased risk of NTDs. These results were different from those by Czeizel et al30. The effect of NVP on NTDs risk may depend on the level of hCG and folic acid. Of course, drug treatment on NVP was not considered as a limitation in this study.In the study, the risk of anencephaly was associated with severe NVP, while spina bifida and encephalocele were not. The NVP may have different effects on the risk of anencephaly and the other two subtypes, which means, the hypothesis was further supported that anencephaly had a different pathogenic mechanism from the other two subtypes. Anencephaly may be more sensitive than spina bifida and encephalocele to folate deficiency. Folic acid supplements are likely to improve the status of folate level in the maternal body changed by NVP.Although some confounders have been adjusted, considering other potential confounders, both NVP and NTDs might be the results of some underlying conditions. The association between NVP and NTDs needs further study considering more potential risk factors. The results showed a strong effect of severe NVP on the risk of encephalocele. However, the actual frequency in both of the case and control women used for calculation was too small to be convincing. Further studies are needed to clarify the actual relationship between severe NVP and the risk of encephalocele.In conclusion, this case-control study reveals that severe or moderate NVP has an association with the risk of NTDs, which was not found in the group with intake of folic acid supplements. So folic acid supplements should be recommended within three months before pregnancy or in the first trimester to use for prevention of NTDs. ReferencesGao, L. J., Zhao, Z. T., Li, D., Jiang, B. F. & Hao, F. R. A case-control study on the risk factors of central nervous system congenital malformations. Chin J Epidemiol 25, 794–798 (2004). Google Scholar Fang, W., Yan-fang, Y. & Pei-zhen, L. A case-control study on the risk factors of neural tube defects in Shanxi province. Chin J Epidemiol 29, 771–774 (2008). Google Scholar Rasmussen, S. A., Chu, S. Y., Kim, S. Y., Schmid, C. H. & Lau, J. Maternal obesity and risk of neural tube defects: a metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 198, 611–619 (2008).Article Google Scholar Molloy, A. M. et al. Maternal vitamin B12 status and risk of neural tube defects in a population with high neural tube defect prevalence and no folic Acid fortification. Pediatrics 123, 917–923 (2009).Article Google Scholar Stothard, K. J., Tennant, P. W., Bell, R. & Rankin, J. Maternal overweight and obesity and the risk of congenital anomalies: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA 301, 636–650 (2009).Article CAS Google Scholar Wolff, T., Witkop, C. T., Miller, T. & Syed, S. B. Folic acid supplementation for the prevention of neural tube defects: an update of the evidence for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med 150, 632–639 (2009).Article Google Scholar Yazdy, M. M., Liu, S., Mitchell, A. A. & Werler, M. M. Maternal Dietary Glycemic Intake and the Risk of Neural Tube Defects. Am J Epidemiol 171, 407–414 (2009).Article Google Scholar Aguilar-Garduno, C., Lacasana, M., Blanco-Munoz, J., Borja-Aburto, V. H. & Garcia, A. M. Parental occupational exposure to organic solvents and anencephaly in Mexico. Occup Environ Med 67, 32–37 (2010).Article CAS Google Scholar Harisha, P. N., Devi, B. I., Christopher, R. & Kruthika-Vinod, T. P. Impact of 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene polymorphism on neural tube defects. J Neurosurg Pediatr 6, 364–367 (2010).Article Google Scholar Yin, Z. et al. A population-based case-control study of risk factors for neural tube defects in Shenyang, China. Childs Nerv Syst 27, 149–154 (2011).Article Google Scholar Zur, E. Nausea and vomiting in pregnancy: a review of the pathology and compounding opportunities. Int J Pharm Compd 17, 113–123 (2013).CAS Google Scholar Wang, M., Wang, Z. P., Zhang, M. & Zhao, Z. T. Maternal passive smoking during pregnancy and neural tube defects in offspring: a meta-analysis. Arch Gynecol Obstet 289, 513–521 (2014).Article Google Scholar Einarson, T. R., Piwko, C. & Koren, G. Quantifying the global rates of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy: a meta analysis. J Popul Ther Clin Pharmacol 20, e171–183 (2013). Google Scholar Lee, N. M. & Saha, S. Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 40, 309–334 (2011).Article Google Scholar Weigel, R. M. & Weigel, M. M. Nausea and vomiting of early pregnancy and pregnancy outcome. A meta-analytical review. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 96, 1312–1318 (1989).Article CAS Google Scholar Deuchar, N. Nausea and vomiting in pregnancy: a review of the problem with particular regard to psychological and social aspects. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 102, 6–8 (1995).Article CAS Google Scholar Zhou, Q., O'Brien, B. & Relyea, J. Severity of nausea and vomiting during pregnancy: what does it predict? Birth 26, 108–114 (1999).Article CAS Google Scholar Boneva, R. S., Moore, C. A., Botto, L., Wong, L. Y. & Erickson, J. D. Nausea during pregnancy and congenital heart defects: a population-based case-control study. Am J Epidemiol 149, 717–725 (1999).Article CAS Google Scholar Czeizel, A. E., Puho, E., Acs, N. & Banhidy, F. Inverse association between severe nausea and vomiting in pregnancy and some congenital abnormalities. Am J Med Genet A 140, 453–462 (2006).Article Google Scholar Wu, Y.-Q. et al. A case-control study of neural tube defects in China. Chin J Med Gene 11, 210–213 (1994).ADS Google Scholar Anderka, M. et al. Medications used to treat nausea and vomiting of pregnancy and the risk of selected birth defects. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 94, 22–30 (2012).Article CAS Google Scholar Czeizel, A. E., Dudas, I., Vereczkey, A. & Banhidy, F. Folate deficiency and folic acid supplementation: the prevention of neural-tube defects and congenital heart defects. Nutrients 5, 4760–4775 (2013).Article Google Scholar Mazzotta, P., Maltepe, C., Navioz, Y., Magee, L. A. & Koren, G. Attitudes, management and consequences of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy in the United States and Canada. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 70, 359–365 (2000).Article CAS Google Scholar Flaxman, S. M. & Sherman, P. W. Morning sickness: a mechanism for protecting mother and embryo. Q Rev Biol 75, 113–148 (2000).Article CAS Google Scholar Weigel, M. M. et al. Food aversions and cravings during early pregnancy: association with nausea and vomiting. Ecol Food Nutr 50, 197–214 (2011).Article Google Scholar Boskovic, R., Rudic, N., Danieliewska-Nikiel, B., Navioz, Y. & Koren, G. Is lack of morning sickness teratogenic? A prospective controlled study. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 70, 528–530 (2004).Article CAS Google Scholar Huxley, R. R. Nausea and vomiting in early pregnancy: its role in placental development. Obstet Gynecol 95, 779–782 (2000).CAS Google Scholar Forbes, S. Pregnancy sickness and embryo quality. Trends Ecol Evol 17, 115–120 (2002).Article Google Scholar Lee, J.-I., Lee, J.-A. & Lim, H.-S. Morning sickness reduces dietary diversity, nutrient intakes and infant outcome of pregnant women. Nutr Res 24, 531–540 (2004).Article CAS Google Scholar Davis, M. Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy: an evidence-based review. J Perinat Neonatal Nurs 18, 312–328 (2004).Article Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThis work was supported by the project of the effectiveness evaluation of hospital-based comprehensive birth defects intervention methods, The Ministry of Science and Technology, China (2006BA105A01).Author informationAuthor notesLu Qing-Bin and Wang Zhi-Ping contributed equally to this work.Authors and AffiliationsSchool of Public Health, Peking University, Beijing, 100191, P.R. ChinaQing-Bin LuDepartment of Epidemiology and Health Statistics, School of Public Health, Shandong University, Jinan, 250012, P.R. ChinaZhi-Ping Wang, Li-Jie Gao, Rui Gong, Xi-Hong Sun, Meng Wang & Zhong-Tang ZhaoAuthorsQing-Bin LuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarZhi-Ping WangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLi-Jie GaoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRui GongView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarXi-Hong SunView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMeng WangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarZhong-Tang ZhaoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsConceived and designed the experiments: Z.T.Z. Performed the experiments: Q.B.L. Z.P.W. L.J.G. M.W. X.H.S. R.G. Analyzed the data: Q.B.L. Z.P.W. Z.T.Z. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: Q.B.L. Z.P.W. L.J.G. X.H.S. R.G. M.W. Wrote the paper: Q.B.L. Z.P.W. Z.T.Z.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing financial interests. Rights and permissions This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International License. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, users will need to obtain permission from the license holder in order to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ Reprints and PermissionsAbout this articleCite this articleLu, QB., Wang, ZP., Gao, LJ. et al. Nausea and Vomiting in Early Pregnancy and the Risk of Neural Tube Defects: a Case-Control Study. Sci Rep 5, 7674 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1038/srep07674Download citationReceived: 16 May 2014Accepted: 05 December 2014Published: 08 January 2015DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/srep07674Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Subjects Nutritional supplementsReproductive disordersRisk factors CommentsBy submitting a comment you agree to abide by our Terms and Community Guidelines. If you find something abusive or that does not comply with our terms or guidelines please flag it as inappropriate. Download PDF Advertisement Scientific Reports (Sci Rep) ISSN 2045-2322 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject Nano Protocol Exchange Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Live Expert Trainer-led workshops Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Career development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Nature events Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Korea Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2023 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature Briefing