Oxygen saturation response to exercise in healthy pregnant women: a simple protocol and normal range - PMC Back to Top Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know The .gov means it’s official. Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site. The site is secure. The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely. Log in Show account info Close Account Logged in as: username Dashboard Publications Account settings Log out Access keys NCBI Homepage MyNCBI Homepage Main Content Main Navigation Search PMC Full-Text Archive Search in PMC Advanced Search User Guide Journal List Obstet Med v.3(2); 2010 Jun PMC4989692 Other Formats PubReader PDF (265K) Actions Cite Collections Add to Collections Create a new collection Add to an existing collection Name your collection: Name must be less than characters Choose a collection: Unable to load your collection due to an error Please try again Add Cancel Share Permalink Copy RESOURCES Similar articles Cited by other articles Links to NCBI Databases Journal List Obstet Med v.3(2); 2010 Jun PMC4989692 As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with, the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. Learn more: PMC Disclaimer | PMC Copyright Notice Obstet Med. 2010 Jun; 3(2): 65–68. Published online 2010 Jun 3. doi: 10.1258/om.2010.090064PMCID: PMC4989692PMID: 27582845Oxygen saturation response to exercise in healthy pregnant women: a simple protocol and normal rangeEdward Langford, MD FRCP,* Ahmad Khwanda, MD,* and Kate Langford, MD FRCOG†Edward Langford*Department of Cardiology, Princess Royal University Hospital, South London Healthcare TrustFind articles by Edward LangfordAhmad Khwanda*Department of Cardiology, Princess Royal University Hospital, South London Healthcare TrustFind articles by Ahmad KhwandaKate Langford†Women's Health Department, St Thomas' Hospital, London, UKFind articles by Kate LangfordAuthor information Article notes Copyright and License information PMC Disclaimer*Department of Cardiology, Princess Royal University Hospital, South London Healthcare Trust†Women's Health Department, St Thomas' Hospital, London, UK Correspondence to: Dr Edward Langford, Cardiology Department, Princess Royal University Hospital, Farnborough Common, Orpington, Kent BR6 8ND, UK, Email: ten.shn@drofgnal.deAccepted 2010 Mar 1.Copyright © The Royal Society of Medicine Press LimitedGo to:AbstractMeasurement of oxygen saturation on excercise, using a pulse oximeter, has been advocated in the assessment of women with shortness of breath in pregnancy. However, there is currently no standard protocol for this. The aims of this study were to determine the normal range for oxygen saturation at rest and on moderate exercise in healthy women from 24 weeks gestation and to evaluate a simple, widely applicable exercise protocol in which women walked at their own pace for 100 metres then up two flights of stairs. The protocol achieved 60–85% maximum predicted heart rate in 99% of women at a median gestation of 31+3 weeks, with a wide range of Hb and BMI. There was a mean 0.3% fall in oxygen saturation on exertion but oxygen saturation did not fall below 95% in any of the women.Keywords: physiology, exercise, oxygen saturation, normal pregnancyGo to:INTRODUCTIONSome degree of shortness of breath is very common in pregnancy, indeed it may be considered to be physiological. However, women attending with shortness of breath present a diagnostic challenge as this may also be the presenting symptom of significant cardiac or respiratory disease. Those conditions causing hypoxia carry a worse prognosis for mother and fetus1 so it is important to differentiate ‘physiological’ from ‘pathological’ shortness of breath. However, at the same time clinicians must avoid unnecessary investigations, particularly those involving ionizing radiation. What is needed is a simple predictor of important disease.In the non-pregnant patient, measuring oxygen saturation with a pulse oximeter (SpO2) at rest and on exertion, as an indicator of arterial oxygen saturation (SaO2), is commonly advocated as a screening device.2 The normal range is well established in men at sea level, with resting SaO2 being 95% or greater. Although extreme exertion in highly motivated athletes may lower SaO2,3 moderate exercise does not cause a fall in SaO2.4 A fall in SpO2 of greater than 4% on exertion suggests a significant gas exchange abnormality, although it is important to ensure motion artefacts are avoided and SpO2 may not accurately represent SaO2 in conditions such as very low SaO2, below 70%, or hypotension with poor peripheral perfusion.2 The use of pulse oximetry on exertion has long been recommended in pregnant women5 but there are few data on the normal range for oxygen saturation at rest and on exertion, and there is no standard exercise protocol to deliver an appropriate cardiovascular challenge in pregnant women.The aims of this study were firstly to establish the normal range for SpO2 on moderate exertion in healthy pregnant women, to determine whether it is comparable with non-pregnant values. The second aim was to evaluate a simple, widely applicable exercise protocol to deliver an appropriate moderate cardiovascular challenge to women in the second and third trimesters of pregnancy.Go to:METHODSSubjects and protocolThe study protocol was approved by the local ethics committee. One hundred healthy women in the second or third trimester of pregnancy were recruited from the ante-natal clinic. Women were excluded if they had given a history of significant cardiac or respiratory disease or if they were unable to give informed consent.Routine data were recorded from the ante-natal records, including age, gestation, haemoglobin concentration, body mass index (BMI), smoking status and whether singleton or twin pregnancy. Following the study, fetal outcome was recorded including survival, gestation at delivery and birthweight.The exercise protocol was carried out at Princess Royal University Hospital, Bromley, UK, at an altitude of approximately 100 m above sea level. A pulse oximeter (Pulsox – 300i, Konica Minolta, Tokyo, Japan) was used to measure SpO2 with the probe on a finger, having removed nail varnish where necessary. Measurements of SpO2 and pulse rate were taken when the women were standing at rest. The women were then exercised at their normal walking pace, so they could still manage to talk, with a walk initially on the flat for 100 m then immediately up two flights of stairs of 12 steps each. Pulse rate and SpO2 were recorded continuously during exercise and the recovery period. Heart rate was recorded both as an absolute value and as a percentage of the maximum predicted heart rate (calculated as 220 minus age).Statistical analysisA paired t-test was used to test whether pulse rate and oxygen saturation changed significantly on exercise compared with resting values. Normally distributed values are expressed as mean ± SD. The range is also given where this is clinically relevant.Go to:RESULTSSubjectsOne hundred women were recruited, aged 31.0 ± 6.8 (range 15–47) years. Median (range) gestation was 31+3 (24+0–40+6) weeks. Mean haemoglobin concentration: 11.7 ± 1.2 (range 7.9–13.9) g/dL. Mean BMI: 27.1 ± 2.9 kg/m2. There were nine current smokers and 26 ex-smokers. None of the women had a history of significant cardiac or respiratory disease. Five of the women were carrying twin pregnancies.Of the 100 women, 99 went on to have a live birth. Birthweights were in the expected range with three babies born below the third centile weight for gestation.Heart rate responseThe resting pulse rate was 91.8 ± 10.4 beats/minute. Pulse rate at peak exercise was 133.6 ± 8.2 beats/minute, representing a 46% increase from baseline and an absolute change of 41.8 beats/minute (95% confidence interval [CI] for difference 39.9–43.6, P < 0.001) (Figure 1). The peak heart rate expressed as a percentage of maximum predicted was 70.9 ± 4.7%, with a range from 58% to 84%. This is demonstrated in Figure 2, showing the number of women achieving each value of percentage maximum predicted heart rate. The results are normally distributed, with the majority of women achieving between 65% and 75% maximum predicted heart rate on exercise. In only one woman did the protocol fail to achieve 60% of maximum predicted heart rate. This woman had a high degree of athletic training and for her the protocol was too easy. As demonstrated in Figure 3, those women with lower resting heart rates experienced a greater rise in heart rate.Open in a separate windowFigure 1Graph of pulse rate on exertion against pulse rate at restOpen in a separate windowFigure 2Peak pulse rate expressed as percentage of maximum predicted heart rateOpen in a separate windowFigure 3Graph of change in pulse rate on exercise against resting pulse rateOxygen saturationsMean oxygen saturation at rest was 98.0 ± 0.95% (range 96–100%). At peak exercise oxygen saturation was 97.7 ± 1.0% (range 95–100%). The mean fall in % oxygen saturation was 0.32 (CI for fall in % oxygen saturation 0.17–0.47, P < 0.001). In no woman did oxygen saturation fall below 95%. Among current smokers the oxygen saturation at peak exercise was 97.0 ± 0.7%.Go to:DISCUSSIONMeasurement of oxygen saturation on exertion is commonly used in the assessment of women with shortness of breath during pregnancy. However, for this to be a useful, objective test it is important to know the oxygen saturation response to a defined cardiovascular challenge in normal pregnant women and to have a standard protocol to deliver an appropriate rise in heart rate. It has previously been found that in healthy non-smoking women, resting oxygen saturation remained at least 97% during pregnancy.6 A study of 40 healthy women at a mean gestation of 25 weeks found that prolonged low-impact aerobic exercise at a level of 70% maximum predicted heart rate caused a small fall in oxygen saturation but this did not fall below 95%.7 However, these small studies do not provide a normal range for the oxygen saturation response to moderate exertion after 24 weeks' gestation. Our study demonstrates that oxygen saturation in healthy women during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy is normally greater than or equal to 95% at sea level, in keeping with the normal value in men. On moderate exertion, defined as a rise in heart rate to 60–80% of maximum predicted heart rate, the oxygen saturation fell as seen previously7 but the fall was only 0.3% and does not appear to be clinically significant. These data suggest that a healthy pregnant woman, without significant cardiac or respiratory disease, is unlikely to have an oxygen saturation of less than 95% on moderate exertion.This study does not address the oxygen saturation response to exercise in women with cardiopulmonary disease. In the non-pregnant population, desaturation of greater than 4% during exercise suggests a gas exchange abnormality with underlying cardiopulmonary pathology such as pulmonary fibrosis, emphysema, cardiac failure or pulmonary hypertension.2 We cannot conclude that the absence of a fall in oxygen saturation excludes such an abnormality and further work is required to assess the sensitivity and specificity of this test. However, it is likely from these data that, as in the non-pregnant population, a fall below 95% saturation would be suggestive of a gas exchange abnormality, since it was not seen in this normal population. With the older generation of pulse oximeters there was a high rate of error due to motion artefact. More recent models, such as the one used in this study, have a much lower error rate8 and pulse oximetry is routinely used in exercise laboratories, but clinicians must still be aware of the possibility of motion artefact.Although some women with serious cardiac or respiratory disease will have oxygen saturations below 95% at rest, in others exercise may be necessary to demonstrate a fall in oxygen saturation. There is no agreed intensity of exercise required to reveal an abnormality. It is likely that more intense exercise will have a higher yield, but many pregnant women will not wish to undergo high-intensity exercise. Moderate exercise is safe in pregnancy9 and it has been recommended that a maximal heart rate of 60–70% maximum predicted is appropriate for women who were previously sedentary and 60–90% maximum predicted for those who were fit prior to pregnancy.10 The value of 60–80% maximum predicted heart rate was chosen as the target in our study in order to provide a significant cardiovascular challenge, likely to reveal any abnormality, while avoiding over-exertion. Allowing women to walk at their own pace, so they were able to talk, also guarded against unduly strenuous exercise, aiming for a rating of perceived exertion of 12–14 on the Borg scale as recommended by Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists guidelines.10 The larger increase in heart rate on exertion seen in women with lower resting heart rates may reflect a greater intensity of exercise performed by those who were fitter, hence higher vagal tone at rest. Since women walked at their own pace, those with a higher level of fitness are likely to have walked faster. However, we did not measure the speed so cannot confirm this.This study demonstrates that a simple exercise protocol, comprising a walk at normal pace and climbing two flights of stairs, represents an appropriate moderate cardiovascular challenge in most pregnant women. This protocol achieved the target of 60–80% maximum predicted heart rate in most women. Only two women had a heart rate rise to greater than 80% maximum predicted heart rate and these did not exceed 85% so the protocol does not represent an excessive amount of exercise. For women who have a high level of athletic training, the protocol may achieve less than 60% maximum predicted heart rate. It is unlikely that such women, for whom the test is ‘too easy’, have significant disease, but a simple extension of the exercise to another flight of stairs could easily provide sufficient challenge to raise the heart rate to the required level.The advantage of this protocol is that it is simple, widely applicable in most clinic settings, and does not require equipment other than a pulse oximeter. It therefore provides a rapid, readily available screening test. However, further studies are required to define the performance of this test in women with known cardiovascular or respiratory disease and therefore the ability of the test to differentiate between physiological and pathological shortness of breath.Go to:REFERENCES1. Siu SC, Sermer M, Colman JM, et al. Prospective multicentre study of pregnancy outcomes in women with heart disease. Circulation 2001;104:515–21 [PubMed] [Google Scholar]2. Lim KG, Morgenthaler TI. Pulmonary function tests, part 2: using pulse oximetry. J Respir Dis 2005;26:85–8 [Google Scholar]3. Dempsey JA, Hanson P, Henderson K. Exercise-induced arterial hypoxaemia in healthy humans at sea-level. J Physiol (Lond) 1984;355:161–75 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]4. Wasserman K, Hansen JE, Sue DE, Stringer WW, Whipp BJ. Principles of Exercise Testing and Interpretation. 4th edn. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2005. [Google Scholar]5. Nelson-Piercy C. Handbook of Obstetric Medicine. Oxford: Isis Medical Media, 1997. [Google Scholar]6. Richlin S, Cusick W, Sullivan C, Dildy G, Belfort M. Normative oxygen saturation values for pregnant women at sea level. Prim Care Update Ob Gyns 1998;5:154–5 [PubMed] [Google Scholar]7. Larsson L, Lindqvist PG. Low-impact exercise during pregnancy – a study of safety. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 2005;84:34–8 [PubMed] [Google Scholar]8. Barker SJ. ‘Motion-resistant pulse oximetry: a comparison of new and old models. Anesth Analg 2002;95:967–72 [PubMed] [Google Scholar]9. Kramer MS, McDonald SW. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2006 Issue 3 Art no.: CD000180 DOI: 10.1002/14651858. CD000180.pub2 [PMC free article] [PubMed]10. Bell BB, Dooley MM on behalf of Guidelines and Audit committee of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Exercise in pregnancy. RCOG statement no. 4. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. 2006 AbstractINTRODUCTIONMETHODSRESULTSDISCUSSIONREFERENCESArticles from Obstetric Medicine are provided here courtesy of SAGE Publications1. Siu SC, Sermer M, Colman JM, et al. Prospective multicentre study of pregnancy outcomes in women with heart disease. Circulation 2001;104:515–21 [PubMed] [Google Scholar] [Ref list]2. Lim KG, Morgenthaler TI. Pulmonary function tests, part 2: using pulse oximetry. J Respir Dis 2005;26:85–8 [Google Scholar] [Ref list]3. Dempsey JA, Hanson P, Henderson K. Exercise-induced arterial hypoxaemia in healthy humans at sea-level. J Physiol (Lond) 1984;355:161–75 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar] [Ref list]4. Wasserman K, Hansen JE, Sue DE, Stringer WW, Whipp BJ. Principles of Exercise Testing and Interpretation. 4th edn. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2005. [Google Scholar] [Ref list]5. Nelson-Piercy C. Handbook of Obstetric Medicine. Oxford: Isis Medical Media, 1997. [Google Scholar] [Ref list]6. Richlin S, Cusick W, Sullivan C, Dildy G, Belfort M. Normative oxygen saturation values for pregnant women at sea level. Prim Care Update Ob Gyns 1998;5:154–5 [PubMed] [Google Scholar] [Ref list]7. Larsson L, Lindqvist PG. Low-impact exercise during pregnancy – a study of safety. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 2005;84:34–8 [PubMed] [Google Scholar] [Ref list]8. Barker SJ. ‘Motion-resistant pulse oximetry: a comparison of new and old models. Anesth Analg 2002;95:967–72 [PubMed] [Google Scholar] [Ref list]9. Kramer MS, McDonald SW. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2006 Issue 3 Art no.: CD000180 DOI: 10.1002/14651858. CD000180.pub2 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Ref list]10. Bell BB, Dooley MM on behalf of Guidelines and Audit committee of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Exercise in pregnancy. RCOG statement no. 4. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. 2006 [Ref list] Other Formats PubReader PDF (265K) Actions Cite Collections Add to Collections Create a new collection Add to an existing collection Name your collection: Name must be less than characters Choose a collection: Unable to load your collection due to an error Please try again Add Cancel Share Permalink Copy RESOURCES Similar articles Cited by other articles Links to NCBI Databases [x] Cite Copy Download .nbib .nbib Format: AMA APA MLA NLM Follow NCBI Twitter Facebook LinkedIn GitHub Connect with NLM SM-Twitter SM-Facebook SM-Youtube National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20894 Web Policies FOIA HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Help Accessibility Careers NLM NIH HHS USA.gov External link. Please review our privacy policy.